A
Abdominal aorta ultrasound see Abdominal
ultrasound
Abdominal aortic aneurysm see Aortic
aneurysm
Abdominal hernia see Hernia
Abdominal thrust see Heimlich maneuver

I Abdominal ultrasound
Definition
Ultrasound technology allows doctors to ‘‘see’’
inside a patient without resorting to surgery. A transmitter sends high frequency sound waves into the body,
where they bounce off the different tissues and organs
to produce a distinctive pattern of echoes. A receiver
‘‘hears’’ the returning echo pattern and forwards it to a
computer, which translates the data into an image on a
television screen. Because ultrasound can distinguish
subtle variations between soft, fluid-filled tissues, it is
particularly useful in providing diagnostic images of the
abdomen. Ultrasound can also be used in treatment.

Purpose
The potential medical applications of ultrasound
were first recognized in the 1940s as an outgrowth of
the sonar technology developed to detect submarines
during World War II. The first useful medical images
were produced in the early 1950s, and, by 1965, ultrasound quality had improved to the point that it came
into general medical use. Improvements in the technology, application, and interpretation of ultrasound
continue. Its low cost, versatility, safety and speed
have brought it into the top drawer of medical imaging
techniques.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

While pelvic ultrasound is widely known and commonly used for fetal monitoring during pregnancy,
ultrasound is also routinely used for general abdominal imaging. It has great advantage over x-ray imaging technologies in that it does not damage tissues
with ionizing radiation. Ultrasound is also generally
far better than plain x rays at distinguishing the subtle
variations of soft tissue structures, and can be used in
any of several modes, depending on the need at hand.
As an imaging tool, abdominal ultrasound generally is warranted for patients afflicted with: chronic or
acute abdominal pain; abdominal trauma; an obvious
or suspected abdominal mass; symptoms of liver disease, pancreatic disease, gallstones, spleen disease, kidney disease and urinary blockage; or symptoms of an
abdominal aortic aneurysm. Specifically:


Abdominal pain. Whether acute or chronic, pain can
signal a serious problem–from organ malfunction or
injury to the presence of malignant growths.
Ultrasound scanning can help doctors quickly sort
through potential causes when presented with general or ambiguous symptoms. All of the major
abdominal organs can be studied for signs of disease
that appear as changes in size, shape and internal
structure.



Abdominal trauma. After a serious accident, such as
a car crash or a fall, internal bleeding from injured
abdominal organs is often the most serious threat to
survival. Neither the injuries nor the bleeding are
immediately apparent. Ultrasound is very useful as
an initial scan when abdominal trauma is suspected,
and it can be used to pinpoint the location, cause,
and severity of hemorrhaging. In the case of puncture wounds, from a bullet for example, ultrasound
can locate the foreign object and provide a preliminary survey of the damage. The easy portability and
versatility of ultrasound technology has brought it
into common emergency room use, and even into
limited ambulance service.
1

Abdominal ultrasound



Abdominal mass. Abnormal growths–tumors, cysts,
abscesses, scar tissue and accessory organs–can be
located and tentatively identified with ultrasound. In
particular, potentially malignant solid tumors can be
distinguished from benign fluid-filled cysts and
abscesses. Masses and malformations in any organ
or part of the abdomen can be found.



Liver disease. The types and underlying causes of
liver disease are numerous, though jaundice tends
to be a general symptom. Ultrasound can differentiate between many of the types and causes of liver
malfunction, and is particularly good at identifying
obstruction of the bile ducts and cirrhosis, which is
characterized by abnormal fibrous growths and
reduced blood flow.



Pancreatic disease. Inflammation and malformation
of the pancreas are readily identified by ultrasound,
as are pancreatic stones (calculi), which can disrupt
proper functioning.



Gallstones. Gallstones cause more hospital admissions
than any other digestive malady. These calculi can
cause painful inflammation of the gallbladder and
also obstruct the bile ducts that carry digestive enzymes
from the gallbladder and liver to the intestines.
Gallstones are readily identifiable with ultrasound.



Spleen disease. The spleen is particularly prone to
injury during abdominal trauma. It may also become
painfully inflamed when beset with infection or
cancer. These conditions also lend themselves well
to ultrasonic inspection and diagnosis.



Kidney disease. The kidneys are also prone to traumatic injury and are the organs most likely to form
calculi, which can block the flow of urine and cause
blood poisoning (uremia). A variety of diseases causing
distinct changes in kidney morphology can also lead to
complete kidney failure. Ultrasound imaging has proven extremely useful in diagnosing kidney disorders.



Abdominal aortic aneurysm. This is a bulging weak
spot in the abdominal aorta, which supplies blood
directly from the heart to the entire lower body.
These aneurysms are relatively common and increase
in prevalence with age. A burst aortic aneurysm is
imminently life-threatening. However, they can be
readily identified and monitored with ultrasound
before acute complications result.

Ultrasound technology can also be used for treatment purposes, most frequently as a visual aid during
surgical procedures–such as guiding needle placement
to drain fluid from a cyst, or to extract tumor cells for
biopsy. Increasingly, direct therapeutic applications
for ultrasound are being developed.
2

The direct therapeutic value of ultrasonic waves
lies in their mechanical nature. They are shock waves,
just like audible sound, and vibrate the materials
through which they pass. These vibrations are mild,
virtually unnoticeable at the frequencies and intensities used for imaging. Properly focused however, highintensity ultrasound can be used to heat and physically
agitate targeted tissues.
High-intensity ultrasound is used routinely to treat
soft tissue injuries, such as strains, tears and associated
scarring. The heating and agitation are believed to
promote rapid healing through increased circulation.
Strongly focused, high-intensity, high-frequency ultrasound can also be used to physically destroy certain
types of tumors, as well as gallstones and other types
of calculi. Developing new treatment applications
for ultrasound is an active area of medical research.

Precautions
Properly performed, ultrasound imaging is virtually without risk or side effects. Some patients report
feeling a slight tingling and/or warmth while being
scanned, but most feel nothing at all. Ultrasound
waves of appropriate frequency and intensity are not
known to cause or aggravate any medical condition,
though any woman who thinks she might be pregnant
should raise the issue with her doctor before undergoing an abdominal ultrasound.
The value of ultrasound imaging as a medical tool,
however, depends greatly on the quality of the equipment used and the skill of the medical personnel operating it. Improperly performed and/or interpreted,
ultrasound can be worse than useless if it indicates
that a problem exists where there is none, or fails to
detect a significant condition. Basic ultrasound equipment is relatively inexpensive to obtain, and any doctor with the equipment can perform the procedure
whether qualified or not. Patients should not hesitate
to verify the credentials of technicians and doctors
performing ultrasounds, as well as the quality of the
equipment used and the benefits of the proposed
procedure.
In cases where ultrasound is used as a treatment
tool, patients should educate themselves about the
proposed procedure with the help of their doctors–as
is appropriate before any surgical procedure. Also,
any abdominal ultrasound procedure, diagnostic or
therapeutic, may be hampered by a patient’s body
type or other factors, such as the presence of excessive
bowel gas (which is opaque to ultrasound). In particular, very obese people are often not good candidates
for abdominal ultrasound.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Abdominal ultrasound

KEY TERMS
Accessory organ—A lump of tissue adjacent to an
organ that is similar to it, but which serves no important purpose, if functional at all. While not necessarily harmful, such organs can cause problems if they
grow too large or become cancerous. In any case,
their presence points to an underlying abnormality in
the parent organ.
Benign—In medical usage, benign is the opposite of
malignant. It describes an abnormal growth that is
stable, treatable and generally not life-threatening.
Biopsy— The surgical removal and analysis of a
tissue sample for diagnostic purposes. Usually, the
term refers to the collection and analysis of tissue
from a suspected tumor to establish malignancy.
Calculus—Any type of hard concretion (stone) in the
body, but usually found in the gallbladder, pancreas
and kidneys. They are formed by the accumulation of
excess mineral salts and other organic material such
as blood or mucous. Calculi (pl.) can cause problems
by lodging in and obstructing the proper flow of fluids,
such as bile to the intestines or urine to the bladder.
Cirrhosis—A chronic liver disease characterized by
the invasion of connective tissue and the degeneration of proper functioning–jaundice is often an
accompanying symptom. Causes of cirrhosis include
alcoholism, metabolic diseases, syphilis and congestive heart disease.
Common bile duct—The branching passage through
which bile–a necessary digestive enzyme–travels
from the liver and gallbladder into the small intestine. Digestive enzymes from the pancreas also enter
the intestines through the common bile duct.
Computed tomography scan (CT scan)—A specialized type of x-ray imaging that uses highly focused
and relatively low energy radiation to produce detailed
two-dimensional images of soft tissue structures, particularly the brain. CT scans are the chief competitor to
ultrasound and can yield higher quality images not
disrupted by bone or gas. They are, however, more
cumbersome, time consuming and expensive to perform, and they use ionizing electromagnetic radiation.

Description
Ultrasound includes all sound waves above the
frequency of human hearing–about 20 thousand
hertz, or cycles per second. Medical ultrasound generally uses frequencies between one and 10 million hertz
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Doppler—The Doppler effect refers to the apparent
change in frequency of sound wave echoes returning
to a stationary source from a moving target. If the
object is moving toward the source, the frequency
increases; if the object is moving away, the frequency decreases. The size of this frequency shift
can be used to compute the object’s speed–be it a
car on the road or blood in an artery. The Doppler
effect holds true for all types of radiation, not just
sound.
Frequency—Sound, whether traveling through air or
the human body, produces vibrations–molecules
bouncing into each other–as the shock wave travels
along. The frequency of a sound is the number of
vibrations per second. Within the audible range,
frequency means pitch–the higher the frequency,
the higher a sound’s pitch.
Ionizing radiation—Radiation that can damage living tissue by disrupting and destroying individual
cells at the molecular level. All types of nuclear
radiation–x rays, gamma rays and beta rays–are
potentially ionizing. Sound waves physically vibrate
the material through which they pass, but do not
ionize it.
Jaundice—A condition that results in a yellow tint to
the skin, eyes and body fluids. Bile retention in the
liver, gallbladder and pancreas is the immediate
cause, but the underlying cause could be as simple
as obstruction of the common bile duct by a gallstone or as serious as pancreatic cancer. Ultrasound
can distinguish between these conditions.
Malignant—The term literally means growing worse
and resisting treatment. It is used as a synonym for
cancerous and connotes a harmful condition that
generally is life-threatening.
Morphology—Literally, the study of form. In medicine, morphology refers to the size, shape and structure rather than the function of a given organ. As a
diagnostic imaging technique, ultrasound facilitates
the recognition of abnormal morphologies as symptoms of underlying conditions.

(1-10 MHz). Higher frequency ultrasound waves produce more detailed images, but are also more readily
absorbed and so cannot penetrate as deeply into the
body. Abdominal ultrasound imaging is generally performed at frequencies between 2-5 MHz.
3

Abdominal ultrasound

An ultrasound machine consists of two parts: the
transducer and the analyzer. The transducer both produces the sound waves that penetrate the body and
receives the reflected echoes. Transducers are built
around piezoelectric ceramic chips. (Piezoelectric
refers to electricity that is produced when you put
pressure on certain crystals such as quartz). These
ceramic chips react to electric pulses by producing
sound waves ( they are transmitting waves) and react
to sound waves by producing electric pulses (receiving). Bursts of high frequency electric pulses supplied
to the transducer causes it to produce the scanning
sound waves. The transducer then receives the returning echoes, translates them back into electric pulses
and sends them to the analyzer–a computer that organizes the data into an image on a television screen.
Because sound waves travel through all the body’s
tissues at nearly the same speed–about 3,400 miles per
hour–the microseconds it takes for each echo to be
received can be plotted on the screen as a distance into
the body. The relative strength of each echo, a function of the specific tissue or organ boundary that
produced it, can be plotted as a point of varying
brightness. In this way, the echoes are translated into
a picture. Tissues surrounded by bone or filled with
gas (the stomach, intestines and bowel) cannot be
imaged using ultrasound, because the waves are
blocked or become randomly scattered.
Four different modes of ultrasound are used in
medical imaging:


A-mode. This is the simplest type of ultrasound in
which a single transducer scans a line through the
body with the echoes plotted on screen as a function
of depth. This method is used to measure distances
within the body and the size of internal organs.
Therapeutic ultrasound aimed at a specific tumor
or calculus is also A-mode, to allow for pinpoint
accurate focus of the destructive wave energy.



B-mode. In B-mode ultrasound, a linear array of
transducers simultaneously scans a plane through
the body that can be viewed as a two-dimensional
image on screen. Ultrasound probes containing more
than 100 transducers in sequence form the basis for
these most commonly used scanners, which cost
about $50,000.



M-Mode. The M stands for motion. A rapid
sequence of B-mode scans whose images follow
each other in sequence on screen enables doctors to
see and measure range of motion, as the organ
boundaries that produce reflections move relative
to the probe. M-mode ultrasound has been put to
particular use in studying heart motion.

4



Doppler mode. Doppler ultrasonography includes the
capability of accurately measuring velocities of moving material, such as blood in arteries and veins. The
principle is the same as that used in radar guns that
measure the speed of a car on the highway. Doppler
capability is most often combined with B-mode scanning to produce images of blood vessels from which
blood flow can be directly measured. This technique
is used extensively to investigate valve defects, arteriosclerosis and hypertension, particularly in the
heart, but also in the abdominal aorta and the portal
vein of the liver. These machines cost about
$250,000.

The actual procedure for a patient undergoing an
abdominal ultrasound is relatively simple, regardless
of the type of scan or its purpose. Fasting for at least
eight hours prior to the procedure ensures that the
stomach is empty and as small as possible, and that
the intestines and bowels are relatively inactive.
Fasting also allows the gall bladder to be seen, as it
contracts after eating and may not be seen if the stomach is full. In some cases, a full bladder helps to push
intestinal folds out of the way so that the gas they
contain does not disrupt the image. The patient’s
abdomen is then greased with a special gel that allows
the ultrasound probe to glide easily across the skin
while transmitting and receiving ultrasonic pulses.
This procedure is conducted by a doctor with the
assistance of a technologist skilled in operating the
equipment. The probe is moved around the abdomen
to obtain different views of the target areas. The
patient will likely be asked to change positions from
side to side and to hold their breath as necessary to
obtain the desired views. Discomfort during the procedure is minimal.
The many types and uses of ultrasound technology makes it difficult to generalize about the time and
costs involved. Relatively simple imaging–scanning a
suspicious abdominal mass or a suspected abdominal
aortic aneurysm–will take about half an hour to perform and will cost a few hundred dollars or more,
depending on the quality of the equipment, the
operator and other factors. More involved techniques
such as multiple M-mode and Doppler-enhanced
scans, or cases where the targets not well defined in
advance, generally take more time and are more
expensive.
Regardless of the type of scan used and the potential
difficulties encountered, ultrasound remains faster and
less expensive than computed tomography scans (CT),
its primary rival in abdominal imaging. Furthermore, as
abdominal ultrasounds are generally undertaken as
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Specific conditions for which ultrasound may be
selected as a treatment option–certain types of tumors,
lesions, kidney stones and other calculi, muscle and
ligament injuries, etc.–are described in detail under
the appropriate entries in this encyclopedia.

Preparation
A patient undergoing abdominal ultrasound will
be advised by their physician about what to expect and
how to prepare. As mentioned above, preparations
generally include fasting and arriving for the procedure with a full bladder, if necessary. This preparation
is particularly useful if the gallbladder, ovaries or veins
are to be examined.

Aftercare
In general, no aftercare related to the abdominal
ultrasound procedure itself is required.

Risks
Abdominal ultrasound carries with it no recognized risks or side effects, if properly performed using
appropriate frequency and intensity ranges. Sensitive
tissues, particularly those of the reproductive organs,
could possibly sustain damage if violently vibrated by
overly intense ultrasound waves. In general though,
such damage would only result from improper use of
the equipment.
Any woman who thinks she might be pregnant
should raise this issue with her doctor before undergoing an abdominal ultrasound, as a fetus in the early
stages of development could be injured by ultrasound
meant to probe deeply recessed abdominal organs.

Normal results
As a diagnostic imaging technique, a normal
abdominal ultrasound is one that indicates the absence
of the suspected condition that prompted the scan.
For example, symptoms such as a persistent cough,
labored breathing, and upper abdominal pain suggest
the possibility of, among other things, an abdominal
aortic aneurysm. An ultrasound scan that indicates
the absence of an aneurysm would rule out this lifeGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

threatening condition and point to other, less serious
causes.

Abnormal results
Because abdominal ultrasound imaging is generally undertaken to confirm a suspected condition, the
results of a scan often will prove abnormal–that is they
will confirm the diagnosis, be it kidney stones, cirrhosis of the liver or an aortic aneurysm. At that point,
appropriate medical treatment as prescribed by a
patient’s doctor is in order. See the relevant disease
and disorder entries in this encyclopedia for more
information.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Freundlich, Naomi. ‘‘Ultrasound: What’s Wrong with this
Picture?’’ Business Week September 15, 1997:84-5.
ORGANIZATIONS

American College of Gastroenterology. 4900 B South 31st
St., Arlington, VA 22206-1656. (703) 820-7400.
<http://www.acg.gi.org>.
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine. 14750
Sweitzer Lane, Suite 100, Laurel, MD 20707-5906.
(800) 638-5352. <http://www.aium.org>.
American Society of Radiologic Technologists. 15000
Central Ave., SE, Albuquerque, NM 87123-3917. (505)
298-4500. <http://www.asrt.org>.

Kurt Richard Sternlof

I Abdominal wall defects
Definition
Abdominal wall defects are birth (congenital)
defects that allow the stomach or intestines to
protrude.

Description
Many unexpected and fascinating events occur
during the development of a fetus inside the womb.
The stomach and intestines begin development outside
the baby’s abdomen and only later does the abdominal
wall enclose them. Occasionally, either the umbilical
opening is too large, or it develops improperly, allowing the bowels or stomach to remain outside or
squeeze through the abdominal wall.
5

Abdominal wall defects

‘‘medically necessary’’ procedures designed to detect the
presence of suspected abnormalities, they are covered
under most types of major medical insurance. As always,
though, the patient would be wise to confirm that their
coverage extends to the specific procedure proposed.
For nonemergency situations, most underwriters stipulate prior approval as a condition of coverage.

Abortion, partial birth

Causes and symptoms
There are many causes for birth defects that still
remain unclear. Presently, the cause(s) of abdominal
wall defects is unknown, and any symptoms the
mother may have to indicate that the defects are present in the fetus are nondescript.

Diagnosis
At birth, the problem is obvious, because the base
of the umbilical cord at the navel will bulge or, in
worse cases, contain viscera (internal organs). Before
birth, an ultrasound examination may detect the problem. It is always necessary in children with one birth
defect to look for others, because birth defects are
usually multiple.

Treatment
Abdominal wall defects are effectively treated
with surgical repair. Unless there are accompanying
anomalies, the surgical procedure is not overly complicated. The organs are normal, just misplaced.
However, if the defect is large, it may be difficult to
fit all the viscera into the small abdominal cavity.

Prognosis
If there are no other defects, the prognosis after
surgical repair of this condition is relatively good.
However, 10% of those with more severe or additional
abnormalities die from it. The organs themselves
are fully functional; the difficulty lies in fitting them
inside the abdomen. The condition is, in fact, a hernia
requiring only replacement and strengthening of the
passageway through which it occurred. After surgery,
increased pressure in the stretched abdomen can compromise the function of the organs inside.

Prevention
Some, but by no means all, birth defects are preventable by early and attentive prenatal care, good
nutrition, supplemental vitamins, diligent avoidance
of all unnecessary drugs and chemicals–especially
tobacco–and other elements of a healthy lifestyle.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Dunn, J. C., and E. W. Fonkalsrud. ‘‘Improved Survival of
Infantswith Omphalocele.’’ American Journal of
Surgery 173 (April 1997): 284-7.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
6

KEY TERMS
Hernia—Movement of a structure into a place it
does not belong.
Umbilical—Referring to the opening in the abdominal wall where the blood vessels from the placenta
enter.
Viscera—Any of the body’s organs located in the
chest or abdomen.

Abnormal heart rhythms see Arrhythmias
ABO blood typing see Blood typing and
crossmatching
ABO incompatibility see Erythroblastosis
fetalis
Abortion, habitual see Recurrent
miscarriage

I Abortion, partial birth
Definition
Partial birth abortion is a method of late-term
(after 20 weeks) abortion that terminates a pregnancy
and results in the death and intact removal of a fetus.
This procedure is most commonly referred to as intact
dilatation and extraction (D & X). It occurs in a rare
percentage of pregnancies.

Purpose
Partial birth abortion, or D&X, is performed to
end a pregnancy and results in the death of a fetus,
typically in the late second or third trimester.
Although D&X is highly controversial, some physicians argue that it has advantages that make it a preferable procedure in some circumstances. One
perceived advantage is that the fetus is removed
largely intact, allowing for better evaluation and
autopsy of the fetus in cases of known fetal abnormalities. Intact removal of the fetus also may carry a lower
risk of puncturing the uterus or damaging the cervix.
Another perceived advantage is that D&X ends the
pregnancy without requiring the woman to go
through labor, which may be less emotionally traumatic than other methods of late-term abortion. In
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Precautions
Women considering D&X should be aware of the
highly controversial nature of this procedure. A controversy common to all late-term abortions is whether
the fetus is viable, or able to survive outside of the
woman’s body. A specific area of controversy with
D&X is that fetal death does not occur until after
most of the fetal body has exited the uterus. Several
states have taken legal action to limit or ban D&X and
many physicians who perform abortions do not perform D&X. This may restrict the availability of this
procedure to women seeking late-term abortions.
In March 2003, the United States Senate passed a
bill banning partial birth abortions and implementing
fines or maximum two-year jail terms for physicians
who perform them. In June 2003, the House approved
a ban as well. President George W. Bush signed the
legislation into law, but a federal judge declared the
law unconstitutional, so that the government had not
been able to enforce it. One of the opponents’ claims
was the legislation did not provide for exceptions for
cases in which the procedure was needed to protect the
mother’s health.

Description
Intact D&X, or partial birth abortion first
involves administration of medications to cause the
cervix to dilate, usually over the course of several
days. Next, the physician rotates the fetus to a footling
breech position. The body of the fetus is then drawn
out of the uterus feet first, until only the head remains
inside the uterus. Then, the physician uses an instrument to puncture the base of the skull, which collapses
the fetal head. Typically, the contents of the fetal head
are then partially suctioned out, which results in the
death of the fetus and reduces the size of the fetal head
enough to allow it to pass through the cervix. The dead
and otherwise intact fetus is then removed from the
woman’s body.

Preparation
Medical preparation for D&X involves an outpatient visit to administer medications, such as laminaria, to cause the cervix to begin dilating.
In addition, preparation may involve fulfilling
local legal requirements, such as a mandatory waiting
period, counseling, or an informed consent procedure
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Abortion, partial birth

addition, D&X may offer a lower cost and shorter
procedure time.

KEY TERMS
Cervix—The narrow outer end of the uterus that
separates the uterus from the vaginal canal.
Footling breech—A position of the fetus while in
the uterus where the feet of the fetus are nearest the
cervix and will be the first part of the fetus to exit the
uterus, with the head of the fetus being the last part
to exit the uterus.
Laminaria—A medical product made from a certain type of seaweed that is physically placed near
the cervix to cause it to dilate.

reviewing stages of fetal development, childbirth, alternative abortion methods, and adoption.

Aftercare
D&X typically does not require an overnight hospital stay, so a follow up appointment may be scheduled to monitor the woman for any complications.

Risks
With all abortion, the later in pregnancy an abortion is performed, the more complicated the procedure
and the greater the risk of injury to the woman. In
addition to associated emotional reactions, D&X carries the risk of injury to the woman, including heavy
bleeding, blood clots, damage to the cervix or uterus,
pelvic infection, and anesthesia-related complications.
There also is a risk of incomplete abortion, meaning
that the fetus is not dead when removed from the
woman’s body. Possible long-term risks include difficulty becoming pregnant or carrying a future pregnancy to term.

Normal results
The expected outcome of D&X is the termination
of a pregnancy with removal of a dead fetus from the
woman’s body.
Resources
PERIODICALS

‘‘Court Rules Abortion Ban Unconstitutional.’’ Medicine &
Health (June 7, 2004): 4–6.
‘‘House Approves Partial Birth Abortion Ban.’’ Medicine
and Health (June 16, 2003): 5.
‘‘Partial-birth Abortion Ban Approved by Senate.’’ Medical
Ethics Advisor (April 2003): 47.
7

Abortion, selective

ORGANIZATIONS

Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Inc.. 810
Seventh Ave., New York, NY 10019. (800) 669-0156.
<http://www.plannedparenthood.org>.
OTHER

Status of partial-birth abortion laws in the states. Othmer
Institute at Planned Parenthood of NYC. 2000.

Stefanie B. N. Dugan, M.S.
Teresa G. Odle

I Abortion, selective
Definition
Selective abortion, also known as selective reduction, refers to choosing to abort a fetus, typically in a
multi-fetal pregnancy, to decrease the health risks to
the mother in carrying and giving birth to more than
one or two babies, and also to decrease the risk of
complications to the remaining fetus(es). The term
selective abortion also refers to choosing to abort a
fetus for reasons such as the woman is carrying a fetus
which likely will be born with some birth defect or
impairment, or because the sex of the fetus is not
preferred by the individual.

Purpose
A woman may decide to abort for health reasons,
for example, she is at higher risk for complications
during pregnancy because of a disorder or disease
such as diabetes. A 2004 case reported on an embryo
embedded in a cesarean section scar. Although rare, it
can be life threatening to the mother. In this care,
selective abortion was successful at saving the mother
and the remaining embryos.
However, selective reduction is recommended
often in cases of multi-fetal pregnancy, or the presence
of more than one fetus, typically, at least three or more
fetuses. In the general population, multi-fetal pregnancy happens in only about 1-2% of pregnant
women. But multi-fetal pregnancies occur far more
often in women using fertility drugs.

KEY TERMS
Multi-fetal pregnancy—A pregnancy of two or
more fetuses.
Selective reduction—Typically referred to in cases
of multifetal pregnancy, when one or more fetuses
are aborted to preserve the viability of the remaining fetuses and decrease health risks to the mother.

cases of multi-fetal pregnancy. Individuals engaging in
fertility treatment should be made aware of the risk of
multi-fetal pregnancy and consider the prospect of
recommended reduction before undergoing fertility
treatment.

Description
Selective reduction is usually performed between
nine and 12 weeks of pregnancy and is most successful
when performed in early pregnancy. It is a simple
procedure and can be performed on an outpatient
basis. A needle is inserted into the woman’s stomach
or vagina and potassium chloride is injected into the
fetus.

Preparation
Individuals who have chosen selective reduction
to safeguard the remaining fetuses should be counseled prior to the procedure. Individuals should
receive information regarding the risks of a multifetal pregnancy to both the fetuses and the mother
compared with the risks after the reduction.
Individuals seeking an abortion for any reason
should consider the ethical implications whether it be
because the fetus is not the preferred sex or because the
fetus would be born with a severe birth defect.

Aftercare
Counseling should continue after the abortion
because it is a traumatic event. Individuals may feel
guilty about choosing one fetus over another. Mental
health professionals should be consulted throughout
the process.

Precautions
Because women or couples who use fertility drugs
have made an extra effort to become pregnant, it is
possible that the individuals may be unwilling or
uncomfortable with the decision to abort a fetus in
8

Risks
About 75% of women who undergo selective
reduction will go into premature labor. About 4-5%
of women undergoing selective reduction also
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Normal results
In cases where a multi-fetal pregnancy of three or
more fetuses is reduced to two fetuses, the remaining
twin fetuses typically develop as they would if they had
been conceived as twins.
Resources
PERIODICALS

‘‘Multiple Pregnancy Associated With Infertility Therapy.’’
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, A Practice
Committee Report (November 2000): 1-8.
‘‘Selective Reduction Eleiminates an Emryo Embedded
in a Cesarean Scar.’’ WomenÆs Health Weekly (April 8,
2004): 117.
ORGANIZATIONS

The Alan Guttmacher Institute. 120 Wall Street, New York,
NY 10005. (212) 248-1111. <http://www.agiusa.org>.
The American Society for Reproductive Medicine. 1209
Montgomery Highway, Birmingham, AL 35216-2809.
(205) 978-5000. <http://www.asrm.org>.

Meghan M. Gourley
Teresa G. Odle

gestational age and is used in determining the stage
of pregnancy. For example, a woman who is two
weeks late having her period is said to be six weeks
pregnant, because it is six weeks since she last
menstruated.
About 90% of women who have abortions do so
before 13 weeks and experience few complications.
Abortions performed between 13-24 weeks have a
higher rate of complications. Abortions after 24
weeks are extremely rare and are usually limited to
situations where the life of the mother is in danger.

Precautions
Most women are able to have abortions at clinics
or outpatient facilities if the procedure is performed
early in pregnancy. Women who have stable diabetes,
controlled epilepsy, mild to moderate high blood pressure, or who are HIV positive can often have abortions
as outpatients if precautions are taken. Women with
heart disease, previous endocarditis, asthma, lupus
erythematosus, uterine fibroid tumors, blood clotting
disorders, poorly controlled epilepsy, or some psychological disorders usually need to be hospitalized in
order to receive special monitoring and medications
during the procedure.

Description
Very early abortions

Abortion, spontaneous see Miscarriage

I Abortion, therapeutic
Definition
Therapeutic abortion is the intentional termination of a pregnancy before the fetus can live independently. Abortion has been a legal procedure in the
United States since 1973.

Purpose
An abortion may be performed whenever there is
some compelling reason to end a pregnancy. Women
have abortions because continuing the pregnancy
would cause them hardship, endanger their life or
health, or because prenatal testing has shown that
the fetus will be born with severe abnormalities.
Abortions are safest when performed within the
first six to 10 weeks after the last menstrual period.
The calculation of this date is referred to as the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Between five and seven weeks, a pregnancy can be
ended by a procedure called menstrual extraction.
This procedure is also sometimes called menstrual
regulation, mini-suction, or preemptive abortion.
The contents of the uterus are suctioned out through
a thin (3-4 mm) plastic tube that is inserted through the
undilated cervix. Suction is applied either by a bulb
syringe or a small pump.
Another method is called the ‘‘morning after’’ pill,
or emergency contraception. Basically, it involves taking high doses of birth control pills within 24 to 48
hours of having unprotected sex. The high doses of
hormones causes the uterine lining to change so that it
will not support a pregnancy. Thus, if the egg has been
fertilized, it is simply expelled from the body.
There are two types of emergency contraception.
One type is identical to ordinary birth control pills,
and uses the hormones estrogen and progestin). This
type is available with a prescription under the brand
name Preven. But women can even use their regular
birth control pills for emergency contraception, after
they check with their doctor about the proper dose.
About half of women who use birth control pills for
9

Abortion, therapeutic

miscarry one or more of the remaining fetuses. The
risks associated with multi-fetal pregnancy are considered higher.

Abortion, therapeutic

Vagina

Vulsellum

Uterus

Embryonic
tissue

Speculum
Extraction tube
Cervix
Between 5 and 7 weeks, a pregnancy can be ended by a procedure called menstrual extraction. The contents of the uterus are
suctioned out through a thin extraction tube that is inserted through the undilated cervix. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

KEY TERMS
Endocarditis—An infection of the inner membrane
lining of the heart.
Fibroid tumors—Fibroid tumors are non-cancerous
(benign) growths in the uterus. They occur in
30-40% of women over age 40, and do not need
to be removed unless they are causing symptoms
that interfere with a woman’s normal activities.
Lupus erythematosus—A chronic inflammatory
disease in which inappropriate immune system
reactions cause abnormalities in the blood vessels
and connective tissue.
Prostaglandin—Oxygenated unsaturated cyclic
fatty acids responsible for various hormonal reactions such as muscle contraction.
Rh negative—Lacking the Rh factor, genetically
determined antigens in red blood cells that produce
immune responses. If an Rh negative woman is
pregnant with an Rh positive fetus, her body will
produce antibodies against the fetus’s blood, causing a disease known as Rh disease. Sensitization to
the disease occurs when the women’s blood is
exposed to the fetus’s blood. Rh immune globulin
(RhoGAM) is a vaccine that must be given to a
woman after an abortion, miscarriage, or prenatal
tests in order to prevent sensitization to Rh disease.

10

emergency contraception get nauseated and 20 percent
vomit. This method cuts the risk of pregnancy 75percent.
The other type of morning-after pill contains only
one hormone: progestin, and is available under the
brand name Plan B. It is more effective than the first
type with a lower risk of nausea and vomiting. It
reduces the risk of pregnancy 89 percent.
Women should check with their physicians
regarding the proper dose of pills to take, as it depends
on the brand of birth control pill. Not all birth control
pills will work for emergency contraception.
Menstrual extractions are safe, but because the
amount of fetal material is so small at this stage of
development, it is easy to miss. This results in an incomplete abortion that means the pregnancy continues.
First trimester abortions
The first trimester of pregnancy includes the first
13 weeks after the last menstrual period. In the United
States, about 90% of abortions are performed during
this period. It is the safest time in which to have an
abortion, and the time in which women have the most
choice of how the procedure is performed.
MEDICAL ABORTIONS. Medical abortions are
brought about by taking medications that end the
pregnancy. The advantages of a first trimester medical
abortion are:

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The procedure is non-invasive; no surgical instruments are used.



Anesthesia is not required.



Drugs are administered either orally or by injection.



The procedure resembles a natural miscarriage.
Disadvantages of a medical abortion are:



The effectiveness decreases after the seventh week.



The procedure may require multiple visits to the doctor.



Bleeding after the abortion lasts longer than after a
surgical abortion.



The woman may see the contents of her womb as it is
expelled.

Two different medications can be used to bring
about an abortion. Methotrexate (Rheumatrex) works
by stopping fetal cells from dividing which causes the
fetus to die.
On the first visit to the doctor, the woman receives
an injection of methotrexate. On the second visit,
about a week later, she is given misoprostol
(Cytotec), an oxygenated unsaturated cyclic fatty
acid responsible for various hormonal reactions such
as muscle contraction (prostaglandin), that stimulates
contractions of the uterus. Within two weeks, the
woman will expel the contents of her uterus, ending
the pregnancy. A follow-up visit to the doctor is necessary to assure that the abortion is complete.
With this procedure, a woman will feel cramping
and may feel nauseated from the misoprostol. This
combination of drugs is 90-96% effective in ending
pregnancy.
Mifepristone (RU-486), which goes by the brand
name Mifeprex, works by blocking the action of progesterone, a hormone needed for pregnancy to continue, then stimulates ulerine contractions thus ending
the pregnancy. It can be taken as much as 49 days after
the first day of a woman’s last period. On the first visit
to the doctor, a woman takes a mifepristone pill. Two
days later she returns and, if the miscarriage has not
occurred, takes two misoprostol pills, which causes the
uterus to contract. Five percent of women won’t need
to take misoprostol. After an observation period, she
returns home.
Within four days, 90% of women have expelled
the contents of their uterus and completed the abortion. Within 14 days, 95-97% of women have completed the abortion. A third follow-up visit to the
doctor is necessary to confirm through observation
or ultrasound that the procedure is complete. In the
event that it is not, a surgical abortion is performed.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Studies show that 4.5 to 8 percent of women need
surgery or a blood transfusion after taking mifepristone, and the pregnancy persists in about 1 percent of
women. In this case, surgical abortion is recommended because the fetus may be damanged. Side
effects include nausea, vaginal bleeding and heavy
cramping. The bleeding is typically heavier than a
normal period and may last up to 16 days.
Mifepristone is not recommended for women with
ectopic pregnancy, an IUD, who have been taking
long-term steroidal therapy, have bleeding abnormalities or on blood-thinners such as Coumadin.
Surgical abortions
First trimester surgical abortions are performed
using vacuum aspiration. The procedure is also called
dilation and evacuation (D & E), suction dilation,
vacuum curettage, or suction curettage.
Advantages of a vacuum aspiration abortion are:


It is usually done as a one-day outpatient procedure.



The procedure takes only 10-15 minutes.



Bleeding after the abortion lasts five days or less.



The woman does not see the products of her womb
being removed.
Disadvantages include:



The procedure is invasive; surgical instruments are
used.



Infection may occur.

During a vacuum aspiration, the woman’s cervix
is gradually dilated by expanding rods inserted into
the cervical opening. Once dilated, a tube attached to a
suction pump is inserted through the cervix and the
contents of the uterus are suctioned out. The procedure is 97-99% effective. The amount of discomfort a
woman feels varies considerably. Local anesthesia is
often given to numb the cervix, but it does not mask
uterine cramping. After a few hours of rest, the woman
may return home.
Second trimester abortions
Although it is better to have an abortion during
the first trimester, some second trimester abortions
may be inevitable. The results of genetic testing are
often not available until 16 weeks. In addition,
women, especially teens, may not have recognized
the pregnancy or come to terms with it emotionally
soon enough to have a first trimester abortion. Teens
make up the largest group having second trimester
abortions.
11

Abortion, therapeutic



Abortion, therapeutic

Some second trimester abortions are performed
as a D & E. The procedures are similar to those used
in the first trimester, but a larger suction tube must be
used because more material must be removed. This
increases the amount of cervical dilation necessary and
increases the risk of the procedure. Many physicians are
reluctant to perform a D & E this late in pregnancy, and
for some women is it not a medically safe option.
The alternative to a D & E in the second trimester
is an abortion by induced labor. Induced labor may
require an overnight stay in a hospital. The day before
the procedure, the woman visits the doctor for tests,
and to either have rods inserted in her cervix to help
dilate it or to receive medication that will soften the
cervix and speed up labor.
On the day of the abortion, drugs, usually prostaglandins to induce contractions, and a salt water
solution, are injected into the uterus. Contractions
begin, and within eight to 72 hours the woman delivers
the fetus.
Side effects of this procedure include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea from the prostaglandins, and pain
from uterine cramps. Anesthesia of the sort used in
childbirth can be given to mask the pain. Many women
are able to go home a few hours after the procedure.
Very early abortions cost between $200-$400.
Later abortions cost more. The cost increases about
$100 per week between the thirteenth and sixteenth
week. Second trimester abortions are much more
costly because they often involve more risk, more
services, anesthesia, and sometimes a hospital stay.
Insurance carriers and HMOs may or may not cover
the procedure. Federal law prohibits federal funds
including Medicaid funds, from being used to pay for
an elective abortion.

Preparation
The doctor must know accurately the stage of a
woman’s pregnancy before an abortion is performed.
The doctor will ask the woman questions about her
menstrual cycle and also do a physical examination to
confirm the stage of pregnancy. This may be done at
an office visit before the abortion or on the day of the
abortion. Some states require a waiting period before
an abortion can be performed. Others require parental
or court consent for a child under age 18 to receive an
abortion.
Despite the fact that almost half of all women
in the United States have had at least one abortion
by the time they reach age 45, abortion is surrounded
by controversy. Women often find themselves in
12

emotional turmoil when deciding if an abortion is
a procedure they wish to undergo. Pre-abortion counseling is important in helping a woman resolve any
questions she may have about having the procedure.

Aftercare
Regardless of the method used to perform the
abortion, a woman will be observed for a period of
time to make sure her blood pressure is stable and
that bleeding is controlled. The doctor may prescribe
antibiotics to reduce the chance of infection. Women
who are Rh negative (lacking genetically determined
antigens in their red blood cells that produce immune
responses) should be given a human Rh immune
globulin (RhoGAM) after the procedure unless the
father of the fetus is also Rh negative. This prevents
blood incompatibility complications in future
pregnancies.
Bleeding will continue for about five days in a
surgical abortion and longer in a medical abortion.
To decrease the risk of infection, a woman should
avoid intercourse and not use tampons and douches
for two weeks after the abortion.
A follow-up visit is a necessary part of the
woman’s aftercare. Contraception will be offered to
women who wish to avoid future pregnancies, because
menstrual periods normally resume within a few
weeks.

Risks
Serious complications resulting from abortions
performed before 13 weeks are rare. Of the 90% of
women who have abortions in this time period, 2.5%
have minor complications that can be handled without
hospitalization. Less than 0.5% have complications
that require a hospital stay. The rate of complications
increases as the pregnancy progresses.
Complications from abortions can include:


uncontrolled bleeding



infection



blood clots accumulating in the uterus



a tear in the cervix or uterus



missed abortion where the pregnancy continues



incomplete abortion where some material from the
pregnancy remains in the uterus

Women who experience any of the following
symptoms of post-abortion complications should call
the clinic or doctor who performed the abortion
immediately.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

severe pain



fever over 100.4 8F (38.2 8C)



heavy bleeding that soaks through more than one
sanitary pad per hour



foul-smelling discharge from the vagina



continuing symptoms of pregnancy

Abscess



Normal results
Usually the pregnancy is ended without complication and without altering future fertility.
Resources

An amoebic abscess caused by Entameoba histolytica.
(Phototake NYC. Reproduced by permission.)

BOOKS

Carlson, Karen J., Stephanie A. Eisenstat, and Terra
Ziporyn. ‘‘Abortion.’’ In The Harvard Guide to
Women’s Health. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1996.

Debra Gordon

Abrasions see Wounds

containing digested germs, digested tissue, white
blood cells, and enzymes.
An abscess is the last stage of a tissue infection
that begins with a process called inflammation.
Initially, as the invading germ activates the body’s
immune system, several events occur:


Blood flow to the area increases.



The temperature of the area increases due to the
increased blood supply.



I Abscess

The area swells due to the accumulation of water,
blood, and other liquids.



It turns red.

Definition



It hurts, because of the irritation from the swelling
and the chemical activity.

Abruptio placentae see Placental abruption

An abscess is an enclosed collection of liquefied
tissue, known as pus, somewhere in the body. It is the
result of the body’s defensive reaction to foreign
material.

Description
There are two types of abscesses, septic and sterile.
Most abscesses are septic, which means that they are
the result of an infection. Septic abscesses can occur
anywhere in the body. Only a germ and the body’s
immune response are required. In response to the
invading germ, white blood cells gather at the infected
site and begin producing chemicals called enzymes
that attack the germ by digesting it. These enzymes
act like acid, killing the germs and breaking them
down into small pieces that can be picked up by
the circulation and eliminated from the body.
Unfortunately, these chemicals also digest body tissues. In most cases, the germ produces similar chemicals. The result is a thick, yellow liquid–pus–
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

These four signs–heat, swelling, redness, and
pain–characterize inflammation.
As the process progresses, the tissue begins to turn
to liquid, and an abscess forms. It is the nature of an
abscess to spread as the chemical digestion liquefies
more and more tissue. Furthermore, the spreading
follows the path of least resistance–the tissues most
easily digested. A good example is an abscess just
beneath the skin. It most easily continues along
beneath the skin rather than working its way through
the skin where it could drain its toxic contents. The
contents of the abscess also leak into the general circulation and produce symptoms just like any other
infection. These include chills, fever, aching, and
general discomfort.
Sterile abscesses are sometimes a milder form
of the same process caused not by germs but by nonliving irritants such as drugs. If an injected drug
like penicillin is not absorbed, it stays where it was
13

Abscess

Specific types of abscesses

KEY TERMS
Cellulitis—Inflammation of tissue due to infection.
Enzyme—Any of a number of protein chemicals
that can change other chemicals.

Listed below are some of the more common and
important abscesses.


Carbuncles and other boils. Skin oil glands (sebaceous glands) on the back or the back of the neck
are the ones usually infected. The most common
germ involved is Staphylococcus aureus. Acne is a
similar condition of sebaceous glands on the face
and back.



Pilonidal abscess. Many people have as a birth defect
a tiny opening in the skin just above the anus. Fecal
bacteria can enter this opening, causing an infection
and subsequent abscess.



Retropharyngeal, parapharyngeal, peritonsillar
abscess. As a result of throat infections like strep
throat and tonsillitis, bacteria can invade the deeper
tissues of the throat and cause an abscess. These
abscesses can compromise swallowing and even
breathing.



Lung abscess. During or after pneumonia, whether
it’s due to bacteria [common pneumonia], tuberculosis, fungi, parasites, or other germs, abscesses can
develop as a complication.



Liver abscess. Bacteria or amoeba from the intestines
can spread through the blood to the liver and cause
abscesses.



Psoas abscess. Deep in the back of the abdomen on
either side of the lumbar spine lie the psoas muscles.
They flex the hips. An abscess can develop in one of
these muscles, usually when it spreads from the
appendix, the large bowel, or the fallopian tubes.

Fallopian tubes—Part of the internal female anatomy that carries eggs from the ovaries to the uterus.
Flora—Living inhabitants of a region or area.
Pyogenic—Capable of generating pus. Streptococcus,
Staphocococcus, and bowel bacteria are the primary
pyogenic organisms.
Sebaceous glands—Tiny structures in the skin that
produce oil (sebum). If they become plugged,
sebum collects inside and forms a nurturing place
for germs to grow.
Septicemia—The spread of an infectious agent
throughout the body by means of the blood stream.
Sinus—A tubular channel connecting one body
part with another or with the outside.

injected and may cause enough irritation to generate
a sterile abscess–sterile because there is no infection
involved. Sterile abscesses are quite likely to turn into
hard, solid lumps as they scar, rather than remaining
pockets of pus.

Causes and symptoms
Many different agents cause abscesses. The most
common are the pus-forming (pyogenic) bacteria like
Staphylococcus aureus, which is nearly always the
cause of abscesses under the skin. Abscesses near
the large bowel, particularly around the anus, may
be caused by any of the numerous bacteria found
within the large bowel. Brain abscesses and liver
abscesses can be caused by any organism that can
travel there through the circulation. Bacteria,
amoeba, and certain fungi can travel in this fashion.
Abscesses in other parts of the body are caused by
organisms that normally inhabit nearby structures or
that infect them. Some common causes of specific
abscesses are:


skin abscesses by normal skin flora



dental and throat abscesses by mouth flora



lung abscesses by normal airway flora, pneumonia
germs, or tuberculosis



abdominal and anal abscesses by normal bowel
flora

14

Diagnosis
The common findings of inflammation–heat, redness, swelling, and pain–easily identify superficial
abscesses. Abscesses in other places may produce
only generalized symptoms such as fever and discomfort. If the patient’s symptoms and physical examination do not help, a physician may have to resort to a
battery of tests to locate the site of an abscess, but
usually something in the initial evaluation directs the
search. Recent or chronic disease in an organ suggests
it may be the site of an abscess. Dysfunction of an
organ or system–for instance, seizures or altered bowel
function–may provide the clue. Pain and tenderness
on physical examination are common findings.
Sometimes a deep abscess will eat a small channel
(sinus) to the surface and begin leaking pus. A sterile
abscess may cause only a painful lump deep in the
buttock where a shot was given.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Since skin is very resistant to the spread of infection, it acts as a barrier, often keeping the toxic
chemicals of an abscess from escaping the body on
their own. Thus, the pus must be drained from the
abscess by a physician. The surgeon determines when
the abscess is ready for drainage and opens a path to
the outside, allowing the pus to escape. Ordinarily, the
body handles the remaining infection, sometimes with
the help of antibiotics or other drugs. The surgeon may
leave a drain (a piece of cloth or rubber) in the abscess
cavity to prevent it from closing before all the pus has
drained out.

Alternative treatment
If an abscess is directly beneath the skin, it will be
slowly working its way through the skin as it is more
rapidly working its way elsewhere. Since chemicals
work faster at higher temperatures, applications of
hot compresses to the skin over the abscess will hasten
the digestion of the skin and eventually result in its
breaking down, releasing the pus spontaneously. This
treatment is best reserved for smaller abscesses in relatively less dangerous areas of the body–limbs, trunk,
back of the neck. It is also useful for all superficial
abscesses in their very early stages. It will ‘‘ripen’’
them.
Contrast hydrotherapy, alternating hot and
cold compresses, can also help assist the body in
resorption of the abscess. There are two homeopathic remedies that work to rebalance the body in
relation to abscess formation, Silica and Hepar
sulphuris. In cases of septic abscesses, bentonite
clay packs (bentonite clay and a small amount of
Hydrastis powder) can be used to draw the infection
from the area.

case, the result is life threatening. Blood poisoning is a
term commonly used to describe an infection that has
spilled into the blood stream and spread throughout
the body from a localized origin. Blood poisoning,
known to physicians as septicemia, is also life
threatening.
Of special note, abscesses in the hand are more
serious than they might appear. Due to the intricate
structure and the overriding importance of the hand,
any hand infection must be treated promptly and
competently.

Prevention
Infections that are treated early with heat (if
superficial) or antibiotics will often resolve without
the formation of an abscess. It is even better to avoid
infections altogether by taking prompt care of open
injuries, particularly puncture wounds. Bites are the
most dangerous of all, even more so because they
often occur on the hand.
Resources
BOOKS

Fauci, Anthony S., et al., editors. Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1997.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Abscess drainage see Abscess incision and
drainage

I Abscess incision & drainage
Definition

Prognosis
Once the abscess is properly drained, the prognosis is excellent for the condition itself. The reason
for the abscess (other diseases the patient has) will
determine the overall outcome. If, on the other
hand, the abscess ruptures into neighboring areas or
permits the infectious agent to spill into the bloodstream, serious or fatal consequences are likely.
Abscesses in and around the nasal sinuses, face, ears,
and scalp may work their way into the brain.
Abscesses within an abdominal organ such as the
liver may rupture into the abdominal cavity. In either

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

An infected skin nodule that contains pus may
need to be drained via a cut if it does not respond to
antibiotics. This allows the pus to escape, and the
infection to heal.

Purpose
An abscess is a pus-filled sore, usually caused by a
bacterial infection. The pus is made up of both live and
dead organisms and destroyed tissue from the white
blood cells that were carried to the area to fight the
infection. Abscesses are often found in the soft tissue
under the skin, such as the armpit or the groin.

15

Abscess incision & drainage

Treatment

Abscess incision & drainage

Liver

Spleen

Stomach

Common sites of abscess
above and below the liver

Colon

Although abscesses are often found in the soft tissue under the skin, such as the armpit or the groin, they may develop in any
organ, such as the liver. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

However, they may develop in any organ, and are
commonly found in the breast and gums. Abscesses
are far more serious and call for more specific treatment if they are located in deep organs such as the
lung, liver or brain.
Because the lining of the abscess cavity tends
to interfere with the amount of the drug that can
penetrate the source of infection from the blood, the
cavity itself may require draining. Once an abscess has
fully formed, it often does not respond to antibiotics.
Even if the antibiotic does penetrate into the abscess, it
doesn’t function as well in that environment.

Precautions
An abscess can usually be diagnosed visually,
although an imaging technique such as a computed
tomography scan may be used to confirm the extent of
the abscess before drainage. Such procedures may also
be needed to localize internal abscesses, such as those
in the abdominal cavity or brain.
16

KEY TERMS
White blood cells—Cells that protect the body
against infection.

Description
A doctor will cut into the lining of the abscess,
allowing the pus to escape either through a drainage
tube or by leaving the cavity open to the skin. How big
the incision is depends on how quickly the pus is
encountered.
Once the abscess is opened, the doctor will clean
and irrigate the wound thoroughly with saline. If it is
not too large or deep, the doctor may simply pack the
abscess wound with gauze for 24–48 hours to absorb
the pus and discharge.
If it is a deeper abscess, the doctor may insert a
drainage tube after cleaning out the wound. Once the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Preparation
The skin over the abscess will be cleansed by
swabbing gently with an antiseptic solution.

Aftercare
Much of the pain around the abscess will be gone
after the surgery. Healing is usually very fast. After the
tube is taken out, antibiotics may be continued for
several days. Applying heat and keeping the affected
area elevated may help relieve inflammation.

Risks
If there is any scarring, it is likely to become much
less noticeable as time goes on, and eventually almost
invisible. Occasionally, an abscess within a vital organ
(such as the brain) damages enough surrounding tissue
that there is some permanent loss of normal function.

Normal results
Most abscesses heal after drainage alone; others
require drainage and antibiotic drug treatment.
Resources
BOOKS

Turkington, Carol A., and Jeffrey S. Dover. Skin Deep. New
York: Facts on File, 1998.
ORGANIZATIONS

National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases. 9000 Rockville Pike, Bldg. 31, Rm 9A04,
Bethesda, MD 20892.

Carol A. Turkington

I Abuse

Description
Physical abuse of a child is the infliction of injury
by another person. The injuries can include punching,
kicking, biting, burning, beating, or pulling the victim’s hair. The physical abuse inflicted on a child can
result in bruises, burns, poisoning, broken bones, and
internal hemorrhages. Physical assault against an
adult primarily occurs with women, usually in the
form of domestic violence. It is estimated that approximately three million children witness domestic violence every year.
Sexual abuse of a child refers to sexual behavior
between an adult and child or between two children,
one of whom is dominant or significantly older. The
sexual behaviors can include touching breasts, genitals, and buttocks; either dressed or undressed. The
behavior also can include exhibitionism, cunnilingus,
fellatio, or penetration of the vagina or anus with
sexual organs or objects.
Pornographic photography also is used in sexual
abuse with children. Reported sex offenders are 97%
male. Reports of child pornography have increased
since with the popularity of the Internet. Females
more often are perpetrators in child-care settings,
since children may confuse sexual abuse by a female
with normal hygiene care. The 1990s and early 2000s
were rocked by reports of sexual abuse of children
committed by Catholic priests. Most of the abuse
appeared to have occurred during the 1970s and a
prominent report released early in 2004 stated that as
many as 10.667 children were sexually abused by more
than 4,300 priests. Sexual abuse by stepfathers is five
times more common than with biological fathers.
Sexual abuse of daughters by stepfathers or fathers is
the most common form of incest.
Sexual abuse also can take the form of rape. The
legal definition of rape includes only slight penile
penetration in the victim’s outer vulva area.
Complete erection and ejaculation are not necessary.
Rape is the perpetration of an act of sexual intercourse
whether:


will is overcome by force or fear (from threats or by
use of drugs).



mental impairment renders the victim incapable of
rational judgment.



if the victim is below the legal age established for
consent.

Definition
Abuse is defined as anything that is harmful,
injurious, or offensive. Abuse also includes excessive
and wrongful misuse of a substance. There are several
major types of abuse: physical and sexual abuse of a
child or an adult, substance abuse, elderly abuse, and
emotional abuse.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Substance abuse is an abnormal pattern of substance usage leading to significant distress or impairment. The criteria include one or more of the following
occurring within a 12-month period:
17

Abuse

tube is in place, the surgeon closes the incision with
simple stitches, and applies a sterile dressing. Drainage
is maintained for several days to help prevent the
abscess from reforming.

Abuse

KEY TERMS
Encopresis—Abnormalities relating to bowel
movements that can occur as a result of stress or
fear.



recurrent substance use resulting in failure to fulfill
obligations at home, work, or school.



using substance in situations that are physically dangerous (i.e., while driving).



recurrent substance-related legal problems.



continued usage despite recurrent social and interpersonal problems (i.e., arguments and fights with
significant other).

Abuse of the elderly is common and occurs mostly
as a result of caretaker burnout, due to the high level
of dependency frail, elderly patients usually require.
Abuse can be manifested by physical signs, fear, and
delaying or not reporting the need for advanced medical care. Elderly patients also may exhibit financial
abuse (money or possessions taken away) and
abandonment.
Emotional abuse generally continues even after
physical assaults have stopped. In most cases it is a
personally tailored form of verbal or gesture abuse
expressed to illicit a provoked response.

Causes and symptoms
Children who have been abused usually have a
variety of symptoms that encompass behavioral, emotional, and psychosomatic problems (body problems
caused by emotional or mental disturbance). Children
who have been physically abused tend to be more
aggressive, angry, hostile, depressed, and have low
self-esteem. Additionally, they exhibit fear, anxiety,
and nightmares. Severe psychological problems may
result in suicidal behavior or posttraumatic stress disorder. Physically abused children may complain of
physical illness even in the absence of a cause. They
also may suffer from eating disorders and encopresis,
or involuntary defecation caused or psychic origin.
Children who are sexually abused may exhibit abnormal sexual behavior in the form of aggressiveness and
hyperarousal. Adolescents may display promiscuity,
sexual acting out, and—in some situations—homosexual contact.
Physical abuse directed towards adults can ultimately lead to death. Approximately 50% of women
18

murdered in the United States were killed by a former
or current male partner. Approximately one-third of
emergency room consultations by women were
prompted due to domestic violence. Female victims
who are married also have a higher rate of internal
injuries and unconsciousness than victims of stranger
assault (mugging, robbery). Physical abuse or rape
also can occur between married persons and persons
of the same gender. Perpetrators usually sexually
assault their victims to dominate, hurt, and debase
them. It is common for physical and sexual violence
to occur at the same time. A large percentage of sexually assaulted persons were also physically abused in
the form of punching, beating, or threatening the victim with a weapon such as a gun or knife. Usually
males who are hurt and humiliated tend to physically
assault people whom they are intimately involved
with, such as spouses and/or children. Males who
assault a female tend to have experienced or witnessed
violence during childhood. They also tend to abuse
alcohol, to be sexually assaultive, and are at increased
risk for assaultive behavior directed against children.
Jealous males tend to monitor a women’s movements
and whereabouts and to isolate other sources of protection and support. They interpret their behavior as
betrayal of trust and this causes resentment and explosive anger outbursts during periods of losing control.
Males also may use aggression against females in an
effort to control and intimidate partners.
Abuse in the elderly usually occurs in the frail,
elderly community. The caretaker is usually the perpetrator. Caretaker abuse can be suspected if there is
evidence suggesting behavioral changes in the elderly
person when the caretaker is present. Additionally,
elderly abuse can be possible if there are delays
between injuries and treatment, inconsistencies
between injury and explanations, lack of hygiene or
clothing, and prescriptions not being filled.

Diagnosis
Children who are victims of domestic violence
frequently are injured attempting to protect their
mother from an abusive partner. Injuries are visible
by inspection or self-report. Physical abuse of an adult
may also be evident by inspection with visible cuts
and/or bruises or self-report.
Sexual abuse of both a child and an adult can be
diagnosed with a history from the victim. Victims can
be assessed for signs of ejaculatory evidence from the
perpetrator. Ejaculatory specimens can be retrieved
from the mouth, rectum, and clothing. Tests for sexually transmitted diseases may be performed.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Substance abuse can be suspected in a person who
continues to indulge in their drug of choice despite
recurrent negative consequences. The diagnosis can
be made after administration of a comprehensive
exam and standardized chemical abuse assessments
by a therapist.

Treatment
Children who are victims of physical or sexual
abuse typically require psychological support and
medical attention. A complaint may be filed with the
local family social services agency that will initiate
investigations. The authorities usually will follow up
the allegation or offense. Children may also be
referred for psychological evaluation and/or treatment. The victim also may be placed in foster care
pending the investigation outcome. The police also
may investigate physical and sexual abuse of an
adult. The victim may require immediate medical
care and long-term psychological treatment. It is common for children to be adversely affected by domestic
violence situations and the local family services agency
may be involved.
Substance abusers should elect treatment, either
inpatient or outpatient, depending on severity of
addiction. Long term treatment and/or medications
may be utilized to assist in abstinence. The patient
should be encouraged to participate in community
centered support groups.

Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the diagnosis.
Usually victims of physical and sexual abuse require
therapy to deal with emotional distress associated
with the incident. Perpetrators require further psychological evaluation and treatment. Victims of
abuse may have a variety of emotional problems
including depression, acts of suicide, or anxiety.
Children of sexual abuse may enter abusive relationships or have problems with intimacy as adults.
The substance abuser may experience relapses, since
the cardinal feature of all addictive disorders is a
tendency to return to symptoms. Elderly patients
may suffer from further medical problems and/or
anxiety, and in some cases neglect may precipitate
death.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Prevention
Prevention programs are geared to education and
awareness. Detection of initial symptoms or characteristic behaviors may assist in some situations. In
some cases treatment may be sought before incident.
The professional treating the abused persons must
develop a clear sense of the relationship dynamics
and the chances for continued harm.
Resources
BOOKS

Behrman, Richard E., et al, editors. Nelson Textbook of
Pediatrics. 16th ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2000.
PERIODICALS

Plante, Thomas G. ‘‘Another Aftershock: What Have We
Learned from the John Jay Report?.’’ America (March
22, 2004): 10.
ORGANIZATIONS

National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
Information. 330 C Street SW, Washington, DC 20447.
(800) 392-3366.
OTHER

Elder Abuse Prevention. <http://www.oaktrees.org/
elder>.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. <http://
www.nida.nih.gov>.

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D.
Bilal Nasser, M.Sc.
Teresa G. Odle

Acceleration-deceleration cervical injury see
Whiplash
ACE inhibitors see Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors

I Acetaminophen
Definition
Acetaminophen is a medicine used to relieve pain
and reduce fever.

Purpose
Acetaminophen is used to relieve many kinds of
minor aches and pains—headaches, muscle aches,
backaches, toothaches, menstrual cramps, arthritis,
and the aches and pains that often accompany colds.
19

Acetaminophen

Elderly abuse can be suspected if the elderly patient
demonstrates a fear of the caretaker. Additionally,
elderly abuse can be suspected if there are signs indicating intentional delay of required medical care or a
change in medical status.

Acetaminophen

Description
This drug is available without a prescription.
Acetaminophen is sold under various brand names,
including Tylenol, Panadol, Aspirin Free Anacin, and
Bayer Select Maximum Strength Headache Pain Relief
Formula. Many multi-symptom cold, flu, and sinus
medicines also contain acetaminophen. The ingredients listing on the container should state if acetaminophen is included in the product.
Studies have shown that acetaminophen relieves
pain and reduces fever about as well as aspirin. But
differences between these two common drugs exist.
Acetaminophen is less likely than aspirin to irritate
the stomach. However, unlike aspirin, acetaminophen
does not reduce the redness, stiffness, or swelling that
accompany arthritis.

Recommended dosage
The usual dosage for adults and children age 12
and over is 325-650 mg every four to six hours as
needed. No more than 4 grams (4000 mg) should be
taken in 24 hours. Because the drug can potentially
harm the liver, people who drink alcohol in large
quantities should take considerably less acetaminophen and possibly should avoid the drug completely.
For children ages 6-11 years, the usual dose is 150300 mg, three to four times a day. A physician should
recommend doses for children under age 6 years.

Precautions
In 2004, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) launched an advertising campaign aimed at
educating consumers about proper use of acetaminophen and other over-the-counter pain killers. Often,
acetaminophen is hidden in many cold and flu products
and people unexpectedly overdose on the medicine.
Some cases have led to liver transplantation or death.
More than the recommended dosage of acetaminophen
should not be taken unless told to do so by a physician
or dentist.
Patients should not use acetaminophen for more
than 10 days to relieve pain (five days for children) or
for more than three days to reduce fever, unless directed to do so by a physician. If symptoms do not go
away—or if they get worse— a physician should be
contacted. Anyone who drinks three or more alcoholic
beverages a day should check with a physician before
using this drug and should never take more than the
recommended dosage. A risk of liver damage exists
from combining large amounts of alcohol and
20

KEY TERMS
Arthritis—Inflammation of the joints. The condition causes pain and swelling.
Fatigue—Physical or mental weariness.
Inflammation—A response to irritation, infection,
or injury, resulting in pain, redness, and swelling.

acetaminophen. People who already have kidney or
liver disease or liver infections should also consult with
a physician before using the drug. So should women
who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Many drugs can interact with one another. A
physician or pharmacist should be consulted before
combining acetaminophen with any other medicine.
Two different acetaminophen-containing products
should not be used at the same time.
Acetaminophen interferes with the results of some
medical tests. Avoiding the drug for a few days before
the tests may be necessary.

Side effects
Acetaminophen causes few side effects. The most
common one is lightheadedness. Some people may
experience trembling and pain in the side or the
lower back. Allergic reactions occur in some people,
but are rare. Anyone who develops symptoms such as
a rash, swelling, or difficulty breathing after taking
acetaminophen should stop taking the drug and get
immediate medical attention. Other rare side effects
include yellow skin or eyes, unusual bleeding or bruising, weakness, fatigue, bloody or black stools, bloody
or cloudy urine, and a sudden decrease in the amount
of urine.
Overdoses of acetaminophen may cause nausea,
vomiting, sweating, and exhaustion. Very large overdoses can cause liver damage. In case of an overdose,
immediate medical attention should be sought. In
2004, researchers announced that an injection to counteract the liver injury caused by acetaminophen overdose has been approved by the FDA.

Interactions
Acetaminophen may interact with a variety of
other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one
or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side
effects may be greater. Among the drugs that may
interact with acetaminophen are alcohol, nonsteroidal
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Causes and symptoms
Causes
Achalasia is caused by degeneration of the nerve
cells that normally signal the brain to relax the
esophageal sphincter. The ultimate cause of this
degeneration is unknown. Autoimmune disease or
hidden infection is suspected.
Symptoms

Resources
PERIODICALS

‘‘Antidote Cleared for Acetiminophen Overdose.’’ Drug
Topics February 23, 2004: 12.
Mechcatie, Elizabeth. ‘‘FDA Launches Campaign About
OTC Drug Risks: NSAIDs, Acetaminophen.’’ Family
Practice News March 15, 2004: 8l

Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Teresa G. Odle

Dysphagia, or difficulty swallowing, is the most
common symptom of achalasia. The person with
achalasia usually has trouble swallowing both liquid
and solid foods, often feeling that food ‘‘gets stuck’’
on the way down. The person has chest pain that
is often mistaken for angina pectoris (cardiac pain).
Heartburn and difficulty belching are common.
Symptoms usually get steadily worse. Other symptoms
may include nighttime cough or recurrent pneumonia
caused by food passing into the lower airways.

Acetylsalicylic acid see Aspirin

I Achalasia
Definition

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of achalasia begins with a careful medical history. The history should focus on the timing of
symptoms and on eliminating other medical conditions that may cause similar symptoms. Tests used to
diagnose achalasia include:


Esophageal manometry. In this test, a thin tube is
passed into the esophagus to measure the pressure
exerted by the esophageal sphincter.



X ray of the esophagus. Barium may be swallowed to
act as a contrast agent. Barium reveals the outlines of
the esophagus in greater detail and makes it easier to
see its constriction at the sphincter.



Endoscopy. In this test, a tube containing a lens and a
light source is passed into the esophagus. Endoscopy is
used to look directly at the surface of the esophagus.
This test can also detect tumors that cause symptoms
like those of achalasia. Cancer of the esophagus occurs
as a complication of achalasia in 2-7% of patients.

Achalasia is a disorder of the esophagus that
prevents normal swallowing.

Description
Achalasia affects the esophagus, the tube that
carries swallowed food from the back of the throat
down into the stomach. A ring of muscle called the
lower esophageal sphincter encircles the esophagus
just above the entrance to the stomach. This sphincter
muscle is normally contracted to close the esophagus.
When the sphincter is closed, the contents of the stomach cannot flow back into the esophagus. Backward
flow of stomach contents (reflux) can irritate and
inflame the esophagus, causing symptoms such as
heartburn. The act of swallowing causes a wave of
esophageal contraction called peristalsis. Peristalsis
pushes food along the esophagus. Normally, peristalsis causes the esophageal sphincter to relax and allow
food into the stomach. In achalasia, which means
‘‘failure to relax,’’ the esophageal sphincter remains
contracted. Normal peristalsis is interrupted and food
cannot enter the stomach.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment
The first-line treatment for achalasia is balloon
dilation. In this procedure, an inflatable membrane
or balloon is passed down the esophagus to the sphincter and inflated to force the sphincter open. Dilation is
effective in about 70% of patients.
Three other treatments are used for achalasia when
balloon dilation is inappropriate or unacceptable.
21

Achalasia

anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as Motrin,
oral contraceptives, the antiseizure drug phenytoin
(Dilantin), the blood-thinning drug warfarin
(Coumadin), the cholesterol-lowering drug cholestyramine (Questran), the antibiotic Isoniazid, and zidovudine (Retrovir, AZT). A physician or pharmacist
should be consulted before combining acetaminophen
with any other prescription or nonprescription (overthe-counter) medicine.

Achondroplasia

Prevention

KEY TERMS
Botulinum toxin—Any of a group of potent bacterial toxins or poisons produced by different strains of
the bacterium Clostridium botulinum. The toxins
cause muscle paralysis.
Dysphagia—Difficulty in swallowing.

There is no known way to prevent achalasia.
Resources
BOOKS

Grendell, James H., Kenneth R. McQuaid, and Scott L.
Friedman, editors. Current Diagnosis and Treatment in
Gastroenterology. Stamford: Appleton& Lange, 1996.

Endoscopy—A test in which a viewing device
and a light source are introduced into the esophagus by means of a flexible tube. Endoscopy permits visual inspection of the esophagus for
abnormalities.
Esophageal manometry—A test in which a thin
tube is passed into the esophagus to measure the
degree of pressure exerted by the muscles of the
esophageal wall.
Esophageal sphincter—A circular band of muscle
that closes the last few centimeters of the esophagus and prevents the backward flow of stomach
contents.
Esophagomyotomy—A surgical incision through
the muscular tissue of the esophagus.
Esophagus—The muscular tube that leads from the
back of the throat to the entrance of the stomach.
Peristalsis—The coordinated, rhythmic wave of
smooth muscle contraction that forces food
through the digestive tract.
Reflux—An abnormal backward or return flow of a
fluid.



Botulinum toxin injection. Injected into the sphincter, botulinum toxin paralyzes the muscle and allows
it to relax. Symptoms usually return within one to
two years.



Esophagomyotomy. This surgical procedure cuts the
sphincter muscle to allow the esophagus to open.
Esophagomyotomy is becoming more popular with
the development of techniques allowing very small
abdominal incisions.



Drug therapy. Nifedipine, a calcium-channel blocker,
reduces muscle contraction. Taken daily, this drug
provides relief for about two-thirds of patients for as
long as two years.

Richard Robinson

I Achondroplasia
Definition
Achondroplasia is the most common cause of
dwarfism, or significantly abnormal short stature.

Description
Achondroplasia is one of a number of chondodystrophies, in which the development of cartilage,
and therefore, bone is disturbed. The disorder
appears in approximately one in every 10,000
births. Achondroplasia is usually diagnosed at birth,
owing to the characteristic appearance of the
newborn.
Normal bone growth depends on the production of cartilage (a fibrous connective tissue). Over
time, calcium is deposited within the cartilage,
causing it to harden and become bone. In achondroplasia, abnormalities of this process prevent the
bones (especially those in the limbs) from growing
as long as they normally should, at the same time
allowing the bones to become abnormally thickened. The bones in the trunk of the body and the
skull are mostly not affected, although the opening
from the skull through which the spinal cord
passes (foramen magnum) is often narrower than
normal, and the opening (spinal canal) through
which the spinal cord runs in the back bones (vertebrae) becomes increasingly and abnormally small
down the length of the spine.

Causes and symptoms
Prognosis
Most patients with achalasia can be treated effectively. Achalasia does not reduce life expectancy
unless esophageal carcinoma develops.
22

Achondroplasia is caused by a genetic defect. It is
a dominant trait, meaning that anybody with
the genetic defect will display all the symptoms of
the disorder. A parent with the disorder has a 50%
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Cartilage—A flexible, fibrous type of connective
tissue which serves as a base on which bone is
built.
Foramen magnum—The opening at the base of the
skull, through which the spinal cord and the brainstem pass.
Hydrocephalus—An abnormal accumulation of
fluid within the brain. This accumulation can be
destructive by pressing on brain structures, and
damaging them.
Mutation—A new, permanent change in the structure of a gene, which can result in abnormal structure or function somewhere in the body.
Spinal canal—The opening that runs through the
center of the column of spinal bones (vertebrae),
and through which the spinal cord passes.
An x-ray image of an achondroplastic person’s head
and chest. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by
permission.)

chance of passing it on to the offspring. Although
achondroplasia can be passed on to subsequent
offspring, the majority of cases occur due to a new
mutation (change) in a gene. Interestingly enough,
the defect seen in achondroplasia is one of only a
few defects known to increase in frequency with
increasing age of the father (many genetic defects are
linked to increased age of the mother).
People with achondroplasia have abnormally
short arms and legs. Their trunk is usually of normal
size, as is their head. The appearance of short limbs
and normal head size actually makes the head
appear to be oversized. The bridge of the nose
often has a scooped out appearance termed ‘‘saddle
nose.’’ The lower back has an abnormal curvature,
or sway back. The face often displays an overly
prominent forehead, and a relative lack of development of the face in the area of the upper jaw. Because
the foramen magnum and spinal canal are abnormally narrowed, nerve damage may occur if the
spinal cord or nerves become compressed. The narrowed foramen magnum may disrupt the normal
flow of fluid between the brain and the spinal cord,
resulting in the accumulation of too much fluid in
the brain (hydrocephalus). Children with achondroplasia have a very high risk of serious and repeated
middle ear infections, which can result in hearing
loss. The disease does not affect either mental capacity, or reproductive ability.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Vertebrae—The individual bones of the spinal column which are stacked on top of each other. There
is a hole in the center of each bone, through which
the spinal cord passes.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is often made at birth due to the characteristically short limbs, and the appearance of a
large head. X-ray examination will reveal a characteristic appearance to the bones, with the bones of the
limbs appearing short in length, yet broad in width. A
number of measurements of the bones in x-ray images
will reveal abnormal proportions.

Treatment
No treatment will reverse the defect present in
achondroplasia. All patients with the disease will be
short, with abnormally proportioned limbs, trunk,
and head. Treatment of achondroplasia primarily
addresses some of the complications of the disorder,
including problems due to nerve compression, hydrocephalus, bowed legs, and abnormal curves in the
spine. Children with achondroplasia who develop
middle ear infections (acute otitis media) will require
quick treatment with antibiotics and careful monitoring in order to avoid hearing loss.

Prognosis
Achondroplasia is a disease which causes considerable deformity. However, with careful attention
23

Achondroplasia

KEY TERMS

Acid phosphatase test

paid to the development of dangerous complications
(nerve compression, hydrocephalus), most people are
in good health, and can live a normal lifespan.

Prevention
The only form of prevention is through genetic
counseling, which could help parents assess their risk
of having a child with achondroplasia.

KEY TERMS
Enzyme—A substance needed to trigger specific
chemical reactions.
Metastasize—Spread to other parts of the body;
usually refers to cancer.
Prostate gland—A gland of the male reproductive
system.

Resources
BOOKS

Krane, Stephen M., and Alan L. Schiller.
‘‘Achondroplasia.’’ In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, edited by Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1997.
ORGANIZATIONS

Little People of America, c/o Mary Carten. 7238 Piedmont
Drive, Dallas, TX 75227-9324. (800) 243-9273.

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Achromatopsia see Color blindness
Acid indigestion see Heartburn

Tissues other than prostate have small amounts
of acid phosphatase, including bone, liver, spleen,
kidney, and red blood cells and platelets. Damage to
these tissues causes a moderate increase in acid phosphatase levels.
Acid phosphatase is very concentrated in semen.
Rape investigations will often include testing for the
presence of acid phosphatase in vaginal fluid.

Precautions
This is not a screening test for prostate cancer.
Acid phosphatase levels rise only after prostate cancer
has metastasized.

Description

I Acid phosphatase test
Definition
Acid phosphatase is an enzyme found throughout
the body, but primarily in the prostate gland. Like all
enzymes, it is needed to trigger specific chemical reactions. Acid phosphatase testing is done to diagnose
whether prostate cancer has spread to other parts of
the body (metastasized), and to check the effectiveness
of treatment. The test has been largely supplanted by
the prostate specific antigen test (PSA).

Purpose
The male prostate gland has 100 times more
acid phosphatase than any other body tissue.
When prostate cancer spreads to other parts of the
body, acid phosphatase levels rise, particularly if
the cancer spreads to the bone. One-half to threefourths of persons who have metastasized prostate
cancer have high acid phosphatase levels. Levels fall
after the tumor is removed or reduced through
treatment.
24

Laboratory testing measures the amount of acid
phosphatase in a person’s blood, and can determine
from what tissue the enzyme is coming. For example, it
is important to know if the increased acid phosphatase
is from the prostate or red blood cells. Acid phosphatase from the prostate, called prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP), is the most medically significant type of
acid phosphatase.
Subtle differences between prostatic acid phosphatase and acid phosphatases from other tissues
cause them to react differently in the laboratory
when mixed with certain chemicals. For example,
adding the chemical tartrate to the test mixture inhibits the activity of prostatic acid phosphatase but not
red blood cell acid phosphatase. Laboratory test
methods based on these differences reveal how
much of a person’s total acid phosphatase is derived
from the prostate. Results are usually available the
next day.

Preparation
This test requires drawing about 5-10 mL of blood.
The patient should not have a rectal exam or prostate
massage for two to three days prior to the test.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Description

Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
site, and the person may feel dizzy or faint. Applying
pressure to the puncture site until the bleeding stops
will reduce bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site
will relieve discomfort.

Normal results
Normal results vary based on the laboratory and
the method used.

Abnormal results
The highest levels of acid phosphatase are found
in metastasized prostate cancer. Diseases of the
bone, such as Paget’s disease or hyperparathyroidism;
diseases of blood cells, such as sickle cell disease or
multiple myeloma; or lysosomal disorders, such as
Gaucher’s disease, will show moderately increased
levels.
Certain medications can cause temporary increases
or decreases in acid phosphatase levels. Manipulation
of the prostate gland through massage, biopsy, or rectal
exam before a test can increase the level.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Moul, Judd W., et al. ‘‘The Contemporary Value of
Pretreatment Prostatic Acid Phosphatase to Predict
Pathological Stage and Recurrence in Radical
Prostatectomy Cases.’’ Journal of Urology (March
1998): 935-940.

Nancy J. Nordenson

Acne vulgaris, the medical term for common acne,
is the most common skin disease. It affects nearly 17
million people in the United States. While acne can
arise at any age, it usually begins at puberty and worsens during adolescence. Nearly 85% of people
develop acne at some time between the ages of 12-25
years. Up to 20% of women develop mild acne. It is
also found in some newborns.
The sebaceous glands lie just beneath the skin’s
surface. They produce an oil called sebum, the skin’s
natural moisturizer. These glands and the hair follicles
within which they are found are called sebaceous
follicles. These follicles open onto the skin through
pores. At puberty, increased levels of androgens
(male hormones) cause the glands to produce too
much sebum. When excess sebum combines with
dead, sticky skin cells, a hard plug, or comedo, forms
that blocks the pore. Mild noninflammatory acne consists of the two types of comedones, whiteheads and
blackheads.
Moderate and severe inflammatory types of acne
result after the plugged follicle is invaded by
Propionibacterium acnes, a bacteria that normally
lives on the skin. A pimple forms when the damaged
follicle weakens and bursts open, releasing sebum,
bacteria, and skin and white blood cells into the surrounding tissues. Inflamed pimples near the skin’s surface are called papules; when deeper, they are called
pustules. The most severe type of acne consists of cysts
(closed sacs) and nodules (hard swellings). Scarring
occurs when new skin cells are laid down to replace
damaged cells.
The most common sites of acne are the face, chest,
shoulders, and back since these are the parts of the
body where the most sebaceous follicles are found.

Acid reflux see Heartburn
Acidosis see Respiratory acidosis; Renal
tubular acidosis; Metabolic acidosis

I Acne

Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of acne is unknown. Several risk
factors have been identified:


Age. Due to the hormonal changes they experience,
teenagers are more likely to develop acne.



Gender. Boys have more severe acne and develop it
more often than girls.



Disease. Hormonal disorders can complicate acne in
girls.



Heredity. Individuals with a family history of acne
have greater susceptibility to the disease.



Hormonal changes. Acne can flare up before menstruation, during pregnancy, and menopause.

Definition
Acne is a common skin disease characterized by
pimples on the face, chest, and back. It occurs when
the pores of the skin become clogged with oil, dead
skin cells, and bacteria.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

25

Acne

Aftercare

Acne

KEY TERMS
Androgens—Male sex hormones that are linked
with the development of acne.
Antiandrogens—Drugs that inhibit the production
of androgens.
Antibiotics—Medicines that kill bacteria.
Comedo—A hard plug composed of sebum and
dead skin cells. The mildest type of acne.
Comedolytic—Drugs that break up comedones
and open clogged pores.
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced
by the adrenal glands with different functions,
including regulation of fluid balance, androgen
activity, and reaction to inflammation.
Estrogens—Hormones produced by the ovaries,
the female sex glands.
Isotretinoin—A drug that decreases sebum production and dries up acne pimples.
Sebaceous follicles—A structure found within the
skin that houses the oil-producing glands and hair
follicles, where pimples form.
Sebum—An oily skin moisturizer produced by
sebaceous glands.
Tretinoin—A drug that works by increasing the
turnover (death and replacement) of skin cells.
Acne vulgaris affecting a woman’s face. Acne is the general
name given to a skin disorder in which the sebaceous glands
become inflamed. (Photograph by Biophoto Associates, Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)



Diet. No foods cause acne, but certain foods may
cause flare-ups.



Drugs. Acne can be a side effect of drugs including
tranquilizers, antidepressants, antibiotics, oral contraceptives, and anabolic steroids.



Personal hygiene. Abrasive soaps, hard scrubbing, or
picking at pimples will make them worse.



Cosmetics. Oil-based makeup and hair sprays worsen acne.



Environment. Exposure to oils and greases, polluted
air, and sweating in hot weather aggravate acne.



Stress. Emotional stress may contribute to acne.

Acne is usually not conspicuous, although inflamed lesions may cause pain, tenderness, itching, or
swelling. The most troubling aspects of these lesions
are the negative cosmetic effects and potential for
26

scarring. Some people, especially teenagers, become
emotionally upset about their condition, and have
problems forming relationships or keeping jobs.

Diagnosis
Acne patients are often treated by family doctors.
Complicated cases are referred to a dermatologist, a
skin disease specialist, or an endocrinologist, a specialist who treats diseases of the body’s endocrine (hormones and glands) system.
Acne has a characteristic appearance and is not
difficult to diagnose. The doctor takes a complete
medical history, including questions about skin care,
diet, factors causing flare-ups, medication use, and
prior treatment. Physical examination includes the
face, upper neck, chest, shoulders, back, and other
affected areas. Under good lighting, the doctor determines what types and how many blemishes are present, whether they are inflamed, whether they are deep
or superficial, and whether there is scarring or skin
discoloration.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Laboratory tests are not done unless the patient
appears to have a hormonal disorder or other medical
problem. In this case, blood analyses or other tests
may be ordered. Most insurance plans cover the
costs of diagnosing and treating acne.

Treatment
Acne treatment consists of reducing sebum production, removing dead skin cells, and killing bacteria
with topical drugs and oral medications. Treatment
choice depends upon whether the acne is mild, moderate, or severe.
Drugs
TOPICAL DRUGS. Treatment for mild noninflammatory acne consists of reducing the formation of new
comedones with topical tretinoin, benzoyl peroxide,
adapalene, or salicylic acid. Tretinoin is especially
effective because it increases turnover (death and
replacement) of skin cells. When complicated by
inflammation, topical antibiotics may be added to the
treatment regimen. Improvement is usually seen in
two to four weeks.

Topical medications are available as cream, gel,
lotion, or pad preparations of varying strengths.
They include antibiotics (agents that kill bacteria),
such as erythromycin, clindamycin (Cleocin-T), and
meclocycline (Meclan); comedolytics (agents that
loosen hard plugs and open pores) such as the vitamin
A acid tretinoin (Retin-A), salicylic acid, adapalene
(Differin), resorcinol, and sulfur. Drugs that act as
both comedolytics and antibiotics, such as benzoyl
peroxide, azelaic acid (Azelex), or benzoyl peroxide
plus erythromycin (Benzamycin), are also used.
These drugs may be used for months to years to
achieve disease control.
After washing with mild soap, the drugs are
applied alone or in combination, once or twice a day
over the entire affected area of skin. Possible side
effects include mild redness, peeling, irritation, dryness, and an increased sensitivity to sunlight that
requires use of a sunscreen.
ORAL DRUGS. Oral antibiotics are taken daily for
two to four months. The drugs used include tetracycline,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

erythromycin, minocycline (Minocin), doxycycline,
clindamycin (Cleocin), and trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim, Septra). Possible side effects include
allergic reactions, stomach upset, vaginal yeast infections, dizziness, and tooth discoloration.
The goal of treating moderate acne is to decrease
inflammation and prevent new comedone formation.
One effective treatment is topical tretinoin along with
a topical or oral antibiotic. A combination of topical
benzoyl peroxide and erythromycin is also very effective. Improvement is normally seen within four to six
weeks, but treatment is maintained for at least two to
four months.
A drug reserved for the treatment of severe
acne, oral isotretinoin (Accutane), reduces sebum
production and cell stickiness. It is the treatment
of choice for severe acne with cysts and nodules,
and is used with or without topical or oral antibiotics. Taken for four to five months, it provides longterm disease control in up to 60% of patients. If the
acne reappears, another course of isotretinoin may
be needed by about 20% of patients, while another
20% may do well with topical drugs or oral antibiotics. Side effects include temporary worsening of
the acne, dry skin, nosebleeds, vision disorders, and
elevated liver enzymes, blood fats and cholesterol.
This drug must not be taken during pregnancy since
it causes birth defects.
Anti-androgens, drugs that inhibit androgen production, are used to treat women who are unresponsive to other therapies. Certain types of oral
contraceptives (for example, Ortho-Tri-Cyclen) and
female sex hormones (estrogens) reduce hormone
activity in the ovaries. Other drugs, for example, spironolactone and corticosteroids, reduce hormone
activity in the adrenal glands. Improvement may
take up to four months.
Oral corticosteroids, or anti-inflammatory drugs,
are the treatment of choice for an extremely severe,
but rare type of destructive inflammatory acne called
acne fulminans, found mostly in adolescent males.
Acne conglobata, a more common form of severe
inflammation, is characterized by numerous, deep,
inflammatory nodules that heal with scarring. It is
treated with oral isotretinoin and corticosteroids.
Other treatments
Several surgical or medical treatments are available to alleviate acne or the resulting scars:


Comedone extraction. The comedo is removed from
the pore with a special tool.
27

Acne

In teenagers, acne is often found on the forehead,
nose, and chin. As people get older, acne tends to
appear towards the outer part of the face. Adult
women may have acne on their chins and around
their mouths. The elderly may develop whiteheads
and blackheads on the upper cheeks and skin around
the eyes.

Acoustic neuroma



Chemical peels. Glycolic acid is applied to peel off
the top layer of skin to reduce scarring.



unless told otherwise, give dry pimples a limited
amount of sun exposure



Dermabrasion. The affected skin is frozen with a
chemical spray, and removed by brushing or planing.



do not pick or squeeze blemishes



reduce stress



Punch grafting. Deep scars are excised and the area
repaired with small skin grafts.



Intralesional injection. Corticosteroids are injected
directly into inflamed pimples.



Collagen injection. Shallow scars are elevated by
collagen (protein) injections.

Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for acne focus on proper
cleansing to keep the skin oil-free; eating a wellbalanced diet high in fiber, zinc, and raw foods; and
avoiding alcohol, dairy products, smoking, caffeine,
sugar, processed foods, and foods high in iodine,
such as salt. Supplementation with herbs such as
burdock root (Arctium lappa), red clover (Trifolium
pratense), and milk thistle (Silybum marianum), and
with nutrients such as essential fatty acids, vitamin B
complex, zinc, vitamin A, and chromium is also
recommended. Chinese herbal remedies used for
acne include cnidium seed (Cnidium monnieri) and
honeysuckle flower (Lonicera japonica). Wholistic
physicians or nutritionists can recommend the proper
amounts of these herbs.

Prognosis
Acne is not curable, although long-term control is
achieved in up to 60% of patients treated with isotretinoin. It can be controlled by proper treatment, with
improvement taking two or more months. Acne tends
to reappear when treatment stops, but spontaneously
improves over time. Inflammatory acne may leave
scars that require further treatment.

Prevention
There are no sure ways to prevent acne, but the
following steps may be taken to minimize flare-ups:


gentle washing of affected areas once or twice every
day



avoid abrasive cleansers



use noncomedogenic makeup and moisturizers



shampoo often and wear hair off face



eat a well-balanced diet, avoiding foods that trigger
flare-ups

28

Resources
PERIODICALS

Billings, Laura. ‘‘Getting Clear.’’ Health Magazine (April
1997): 48-52.
ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Dermatology. 930 N. Meacham
Road, P.O. Box 4014, Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014.
(847) 330-0230. Fax: (847) 330-0050. <http://
www.aad.org>.

Mercedes McLaughlin

Acne rosacea see Rosacea
Acoustic neurinoma see Acoustic neuroma

I Acoustic neuroma
Definition
An acoustic neuroma is a benign tumor involving
cells of the myelin sheath that surrounds the vestibulocochlear nerve (eighth cranial nerve).

Description
The vestibulocochlear nerve extends from the
inner ear to the brain and is made up of a vestibular
branch, often called the vestibular nerve, and a
cochlear branch, called the cochlear nerve. The vestibular and cochlear nerves lie next to one another. They
also run along side other cranial nerves. People possess
two of each type of vestibulocochlear nerve, one that
extends from the left ear and one that extends from the
right ear.
The vestibular nerve transmits information concerning balance from the inner ear to the brain and the
cochlear nerve transmits information about hearing.
The vestibular nerve, like many nerves, is surrounded
by a cover called a myelin sheath. A tumor, called
a schwannoma, can sometimes develop from the cells
of the myelin sheath. A tumor is an abnormal growth
of tissue that results from the uncontrolled growth of
cells. Acoustic neuromas are often called vestibular
schwannomas because they are tumors that arise
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

An acoustic neuroma can arise from the left
vestibular nerve or the right vestibular nerve. A unilateral tumor is a tumor arising from one nerve and
a bilateral tumor arises from both vestibular nerves.
Unilateral acoustic neuromas usually occur spontaneously (by chance). Bilateral acoustic neuromas
occur as part of a hereditary condition called
Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2). A person with
NF2 has inherited a predisposition for developing acoustic neuromas and other tumors of the
nerve cells.
Acoustic neuromas usually grow slowly and
can take years to develop. Some acoustic neuromas
remain so small that they do not cause any symptoms. As the acoustic neuroma grows it can interfere with the functioning of the vestibular nerve
and can cause vertigo and balance difficulties. If
the acoustic nerve grows large enough to press
against the cochlear nerve, then hearing loss and
a ringing (tinnitus) in the affected ear will usually
occur. If untreated and the acoustic neuroma continues to grow it can press against other nerves in
the region and cause other symptoms. This tumor
can be life threatening if it becomes large enough
to press against and interfere with the functioning
of the brain.

Causes and symptoms
Causes

KEY TERMS
Benign tumor—A localized overgrowth of cells
that does not spread to other parts of the body.
Chromosome—A microscopic structure, made of a
complex of proteins and DNA, that is found within
each cell of the body.
Computed tomography (CT)—An examination
that uses a computer to compile and analyze the
images produced by x rays projected at a particular
part of the body.
Cranial nerves—The set of twelve nerves found on
each side of the head and neck that control the
sensory and muscle functions of a number of organs
such as the eyes, nose, tongue face and throat.
DNA testing—Testing for a change or changes in a
gene or genes.
Gene— A building block of inheritance, made up
of a compound called DNA (deoxyribonucleic
acid) and containing the instructions for the production of a particular protein. Each gene is found
on a specific location on a chromosome.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—A test which
uses an external magnetic field instead of x rays to
visualize different tissues of the body.
Myelin sheath—The cover that surrounds many
nerve cells and helps to increase the speed by
which information travels along the nerve.
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)—A hereditary
condition associated with an increased risk of bilateral acoustic neuromas, other nerve cell tumors
and cataracts.
Protein— A substance produced by a gene that is
involved in creating the traits of the human body
such as hair and eye color or is involved in controlling the basic functions of the human body.

An acoustic neuroma is caused by a change or
absence of both of the NF2 tumor suppressor genes
in a nerve cell. Every person possesses a pair of NF2
genes in every cell of their body including their nerve
cells. One NF2 gene is inherited from the egg cell of the
mother and one NF2 gene is inherited from the sperm
cell of the father. The NF2 gene is responsible for
helping to prevent the formation of tumors in the
nerve cells. In particular the NF2 gene helps to prevent
acoustic neuromas.

Schwannoma—A tumor derived from the cells of
the myelin sheath that surrounds many nerve cells.
Tinnitus—A ringing sound or other noise in the ear.

Only one unchanged and functioning NF2 gene
is necessary to prevent the formation of an acoustic
neuroma. If both NF2 genes become changed or
missing in one of the myelin sheath cells of the

vestibular nerve then an acoustic neuroma will usually
develop. Most unilateral acoustic neuromas result
when the NF2 genes become spontaneously changed
or missing. Someone with a unilateral acoustic

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Vertigo—A feeling of spinning or whirling.
Vestibulocochlear nerve (Eighth cranial nerve)—
Nerve that transmits information, about hearing
and balance from the ear to the brain.

29

Acoustic neuroma

from the myelin sheath that surrounds the vestibular
nerve. Acoustic neuromas are considered benign
(non-cancerous) tumors since they do not spread
to other parts of the body. They can occur anywhere along the vestibular nerve but are most likely
to occur where the vestibulocochlear nerve passes
through the tiny bony canal that connects the brain
and the inner ear.

Acoustic neuroma

neuroma that has developed spontaneously is not at
increased risk for having children with an acoustic
neuroma. Some unilateral acoustic neuromas result
from the hereditary condition NF2. It is also possible
that some unilateral acoustic neuromas may be caused
by changes in other genes responsible for preventing
the formation of tumors.
Bilateral acoustic neuromas result when someone is affected with the hereditary condition NF2.
A person with NF2 is typically born with one
unchanged and one changed or missing NF2 gene
in every cell of their body. Sometimes they inherit
this change from their mother or father. Sometimes
the change occurs spontaneously when the egg and
sperm come together to form the first cell of the
baby. The children of a person with NF2 have a
50% chance of inheriting the changed or missing
NF2 gene.
A person with NF2 will develop an acoustic neuroma if the remaining unchanged NF2 gene becomes
spontaneously changed or missing in one of the myelin
sheath cells of their vestibular nerve. People with NF2
often develop acoustic neuromas at a younger age.
The mean age of onset of acoustic neuroma in NF2
is 31 years of age versus 50 years of age for sporadic
acoustic neuromas. Not all people with NF2, however,
develop acoustic neuromas. People with NF2 are at
increased risk for developing cataracts and tumors in
other nerve cells.
Most people with a unilateral acoustic neuroma
are not affected with NF2. Some people with NF2,
however, only develop a tumor in one of the vestibulocochlear nerves. Others may initially be diagnosed
with a unilateral tumor but may develop a tumor in the
other nerve a number of years later. NF2 should be
considered in someone under the age of 40 who has a
unilateral acoustic neuroma. Someone with a unilateral acoustic neuroma and other family members
diagnosed with NF2 probably is affected with NF2.
Someone with a unilateral acoustic neuroma and
other symptoms of NF2 such as cataracts and other
tumors may also be affected with NF2. On the other
hand, someone over the age of 50 with a unilateral
acoustic neuroma, no other tumors and no family
history of NF2 is very unlikely to be affected
with NF2.
Recent studies in Europe have suggested a possible connection between the widespread use of mobile
phones and an increased risk of developing acoustic
neuromas. Some observers, however, question
whether mobile phones have been in use long enough
to be an identifiable risk factor.
30

Symptoms
Small acoustic neuromas usually only interfere
with the functioning of the vestibulocochlear nerve.
The most common first symptom of an acoustic neuroma is hearing loss, which is often accompanied by a
ringing sound (tinnitis). People with acoustic neuromas sometimes report difficulties in using the phone
and difficulties in perceiving the tone of a musical
instrument or sound even when their hearing appears
to be otherwise normal. In most cases the hearing loss
is initially subtle and worsens gradually over time
until deafness occurs in the affected ear. In approximately 10% of cases the hearing loss is sudden and
severe.
Acoustic neuromas can also affect the functioning of the vestibular branch of the vestibulocochlear
nerve and van cause vertigo and dysequilibrium.
Twenty percent of small tumors are associated with
periodic vertigo, which is characterized by dizziness
or a whirling sensation. Larger acoustic neuromas are
less likely to cause vertigo but more likely to cause
dysequilibrium. Dysequilibrium, which is characterized by minor clumsiness and a general feeling of
instability, occurs in nearly 50% of people with an
acoustic neuroma.
As the tumor grows larger it can press on the
surrounding cranial nerves. Compression of the fifth
cranial nerve can result in facial pain and or numbness. Compression of the seventh cranial nerve can
cause spasms, weakness or paralysis of the facial
muscles. Double vision is a rare symptom but can
result when the 6th cranial nerve is affected.
Swallowing and/or speaking difficulties can occur if
the tumor presses against the 9th, 10th, or 12th cranial nerves.
If left untreated, the tumor can become large
enough to press against and affect the functioning
of the brain stem. The brain stem is the stalk like
portion of the brain that joins the spinal cord to the
cerebrum, the thinking and reasoning part of the
brain. Different parts of the brainstem have different
functions such as the control of breathing and muscle
coordination. Large tumors that impact the brain
stem can result in headaches, walking difficulties
(gait ataxia) and involuntary shaking movements of
the muscles (tremors). In rare cases when an acoustic
neuroma remains undiagnosed and untreated it can
cause nausea, vomiting, lethargy and eventually
coma, respiratory difficulties and death. In the vast
majority of cases, however, the tumor is discovered
and treated long before it is large enough to cause
such serious manifestations.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Anyone with symptoms of hearing loss should
undergo hearing evaluations. Pure tone and speech
audiometry are two screening tests that are often
used to evaluate hearing. Pure tone audiometry
tests to see how well someone can hear tones of
different volume and pitch and speech audiometry
tests to see how well someone can hear and recognize speech. An acoustic neuroma is suspected in
someone with unilateral hearing loss or hearing loss
that is less severe in one ear than the other ear
(asymmetrical).
Sometimes an auditory brainstem response (ABR,
BAER) test is performed to help establish whether
someone is likely to have an acoustic neuroma.
During the ABR examination, a harmless electrical
impulse is passed from the inner ear to the brainstem.
An acoustic neuroma can interfere with the passage of
this electrical impulse and this interference can, sometimes be identified through the ABR evaluation.
A normal ABR examination does not rule out the
possibility of an acoustic neuroma. An abnormal
ABR examination increases the likelihood that an
acoustic neuroma is present but other tests are necessary to confirm the presence of a tumor.
If an acoustic neuroma is strongly suspected then
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is usually performed. The MRI is a very accurate evaluation that
is able to detect nearly 100% of acoustic neuromas.
Computerized tomography (CT scan, CAT scan)is
unable to identify smaller tumors; but it can be used
when an acoustic neuroma is suspected and an MRI
evaluation cannot be performed.
Once an acoustic neuroma is diagnosed, an evaluation by genetic specialists such as a geneticist and
genetic counselor may be recommended. The purpose
of this evaluation is to obtain a detailed family history
and check for signs of NF2. If NF2 is strongly suspected then DNA testing may be recommended. DNA
testing involves checking the blood cells obtained from
a routine blood draw for the common gene changes
associated with NF2.

Treatment
The three treatment options for acoustic neuroma
are surgery, radiation, and observation. The physician
and patient should discuss the pros and cons of
the different options prior to making a decision
about treatment. The patient’s, physical health, age,
symptoms, tumor size, and tumor location should be
considered.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Microsurgery
The surgical removal of the tumor or tumors is the
most common treatment for acoustic neuroma. In
most cases the entire tumor is removed during the
surgery. If the tumor is large and causing significant
symptoms, yet there is a need to preserve hearing
in that ear, then only part of the tumor may be
removed. During the procedure the tumor is removed
under microscopic guidance and general anesthetic.
Monitoring of the neighboring cranial nerves is done
during the procedure so that damage to these nerves
can be prevented. If preservation of hearing is a possibility, then monitoring of hearing will also take place
during the surgery.
Most people stay in the hospital four to seven days
following the surgery. Total recovery usually takes
four to six weeks. Most people experience fatigue and
head discomfort following the surgery. Problems with
balance and head and neck stiffness are also common.
The mortality rate of this type of surgery is less than
2% at most major centers. Approximately 20% of
patients experience some degree of post-surgical complications. In most cases these complications can be
managed successfully and do not result in long term
medical problems. Surgery brings with it a risk of
stroke, damage to the brain stem, infection, leakage
of spinal fluid and damage to the cranial nerves.
Hearing loss and/or tinnitis often result from the surgery. A follow-up MRI is recommended one to five
years following the surgery because of possible
regrowth of the tumor.
Stereotactic radiation therapy
During stereotactic radiation therapy, also called
radiosurgery or radiotherapy, many small beams of
radiation are aimed directly at the acoustic neuroma.
The radiation is administered in a single large dose,
under local anesthetic and is performed on an outpatient basis. This results in a high dose of radiation
to the tumor but little radiation exposure to the
surrounding area. This treatment approach is limited
to small or medium tumors. The goal of the surgery is
to cause tumor shrinkage or at least limit the growth
of the tumor. The long-term efficacy and risks of this
treatment approach are not known; however, as of
the early 2000s, more and more patients diagnosed
with acoustic neuromas are choosing this form of
therapy. Periodic MRI monitoring throughout the
life of the patient is therefore recommended.
Radiation therapy can cause hearing loss which
can sometimes occurs even years later. Radiation therapy can also cause damage to neighboring cranial
31

Acoustic neuroma

Diagnosis

Acrocyanosis

nerves, which can result in symptoms such as numbness, pain or paralysis of the facial muscles. In many
cases these symptoms are temporary. Radiation treatment can also induce the formation of other benign or
malignant schwannomas. This type of treatment may
therefore be contraindicated in the treatment of acoustic neuromas in those with NF2 who are predisposed
to developing schwannomas and other tumors.
Observation
Acoustic neuromas are usually slow growing and
in some cases they will stop growing and even become
smaller or disappear entirely. It may therefore be
appropriate in some cases to hold off on treatment
and to periodically monitor the tumor through MRI
evaluations. Long-term observation may be appropriate for example in an elderly person with a small
acoustic neuroma and few symptoms. Periodic observation may also be indicated for someone with a small
and asymptomatic acoustic neuroma that was
detected through an evaluation for another medical
problem. Observation may also be suggested for someone with an acoustic neuroma in the only hearing ear
or in the ear that has better hearing. The danger of an
observational approach is that as the tumor grows
larger it can become more difficult to treat.

Prognosis
The prognosis for someone with a unilateral
acoustic neuroma is usually quite good provided the
tumor is diagnosed early and appropriate treatment is
instituted. Long term-hearing loss and tinnitis in the
affected ear are common, even if appropriate treatment is provided. Many patients also experience
facial weakness, balance problems, and headaches.
Regrowth of the tumor is also a possibility following
surgery or radiation therapy and repeat treatment may
be necessary. The prognosis can be poorer for those
with NF2 who have an increased risk of bilateral
acoustic neuromas and other tumors.

Kundi, M., K. Mild, L. Hardell, and M. O. Mattsson.
‘‘Mobile Telephones and Cancer—A Review of
Epidemiological Evidence.’’ Journal of Toxicology and
Environmental Health, Part B, Critical Reviews 7
(September-October 2004): 351–384.
Ryzenman, J. M., M. L. Pensak, and J. M. Tew, Jr. ‘‘Patient
Perception of Comorbid Conditions After Acoustic
Neuroma Management: Survey Results from the
Acoustic Neuroma Association.’’ Laryngoscope 114
(May 2004): 814–820.
ORGANIZATIONS

Acoustic Neuroma Association. 600 Peachtree Pkwy, Suite
108, Cumming, GA 30041-6899. (770) 205-8211. Fax:
(770) 205-0239. ANAusa@aol.com. [cited June 28,
2001]. <http://anausa.org>.
Acoustic Neuroma Association of Canada Box 369,
Edmonton, AB T5J 2J6. 1-800-561-ANAC(2622).
(780)428-3384. anac@compusmart.ab.ca. [cited June
28, 2001]. <http://www.anac.ca>.
Seattle Acoustic Neuroma Group. Emcityland@aol.com.
[cited June 28, 2001]. <http://acousticneuromaseattle.org/entryenglish.html>.
OTHER

National Institute of Health Consensus Statement Online.
Acoustic Neuroma 9, no. 4 (December 11-13, 1991).
[cited June 28, 2001]. <http://text.nlm.nih.gov/nih/cdc/
www/87txt.html>.
University of California at San Francisco (UCSF).
Information on Acoustic Neuromas. March 18, 1998.
[cited June 28, 2001]. <http://itsa.ucsf.edu/~rkj/
IndexAN.html>.

Lisa Andres, MS, CGC
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD

Acquired hypogammaglobulinemia see
Common variable immunodeficiency
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome see
AIDS

Resources
BOOKS

Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD., editors.
‘‘Acoustic Neuroma.’’ Section 7, Chapter 85 In The
Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. Whitehouse
Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 2002.
PERIODICALS

Kondziolka, D., L. D. Lundsford, and J. C. Flickinger.
‘‘Acoustic Neuroma Radiosurgery. Origins,
Contemporary Use and Future Expectations.’’
Neurochirurgie 50 (June 2004): 427–435.

32

I Acrocyanosis
Definition
Acrocyanosis is a decrease in the amount of
oxygen delivered to the extremities. The hands and
feet turn blue because of the lack of oxygen.
Decreased blood supply to the affected areas is caused
by constriction or spasm of small blood vessels.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Acrocyanosis is a painless disorder caused by constriction or narrowing of small blood vessels in the
skin of affected patients. The spasm of the blood
vessels decreases the amount of blood that passes
through them, resulting in less blood being delivered
to the hands and feet. The hands may be the main area
affected. The affected areas turn blue and become cold
and sweaty. Localized swelling may also occur.
Emotion and cold temperatures can worsen the symptoms, while warmth can decrease symptoms. The disease is seen mainly in women and the effect of the
disorder is mainly cosmetic. People with the disease
tend to be uncomfortable, with sweaty, cold, bluish
colored hands and feet.

KEY TERMS
Sympathetic nerve—A nerve of the autonomic nervous system that regulates involuntary and automatic reactions, especially to stress.

Prognosis
Acrocyanosis is a benign and persistent disease.
The main concern of patients is cosmetic. Left
untreated, the disease does not worsen.
Resources
BOOKS

Causes and symptoms
The sympathetic nerves cause constriction or
spasms in the peripheral blood vessels that supply
blood to the extremities. The spasms are a contraction
of the muscles in the walls of the blood vessels. The
contraction decreases the internal diameter of the
blood vessels, thereby decreasing the amount of
blood flow through the affected area. The spasms
occur on a persistent basis, resulting in long term
reduction of blood supply to the hands and feet.
Sufficient blood still passes through the blood vessels
so that the tissue in the affected areas does not starve
for oxygen or die. Mainly, blood vessels near the surface of the skin are affected.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by observation of the main
clinical symptoms, including persistently blue and
sweaty hands and/or feet and a lack of pain. Cooling
the hands increases the blueness, while warming the
hands decreases the blue color. The acrocyanosis
patient’s pulse is normal, which rules out obstructive
diseases. Raynaud’s disease differs from acrocyanosis
in that it causes white and red skin coloration phases,
not just bluish discoloration.

Treatment
Acrocyanosis usually isn’t treated. Drugs that
block the uptake of calcium (calcium channel blockers)
and alpha-one antagonists reduce the symptoms in
most cases. Drugs that dilate blood vessels are
only effective some of the time. Sweating from the
affected areas can be profuse and require treatment.
Surgery to cut the sympathetic nerves is performed
rarely.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, editors. The
Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.

John T. Lohr, PhD

I Acromegaly and gigantism
Definition
Acromegaly is a disorder in which the abnormal release of a particular chemical from the pituitary gland in the brain causes increased growth in
bone and soft tissue, as well as a variety of other
disturbances throughout the body. This chemical
released from the pituitary gland is called growth
hormone (GH). The body’s ability to process and
use nutrients like fats and sugars is also altered. In
children whose bony growth plates have not closed,
the chemical changes of acromegaly result in
exceptional growth of long bones. This variant is
called gigantism, with the additional bone growth
causing unusual height. When the abnormality occurs
after bone growth stops, the disorder is called
acromegaly.

Description
Acromegaly is a relatively rare disorder, occurring
in approximately 50 out of every one million people
(50/1,000,000). Both men and women are affected.
Because the symptoms of acromegaly occur so gradually, diagnosis is often delayed. The majority of patients
are not identified until they are middle aged.
33

Acromegaly and gigantism

Description

Acromegaly and gigantism

KEY TERMS
Adenoma—A type of noncancerous (benign) tumor
that often involves the overgrowth of certain cells
found in glands.
Gland—A collection of cells that releases certain
chemicals, or hormones, that are important to the
functioning of other organs or body systems.
Hormone—A chemical produced in one part of the
body that travels to another part of the body in order
to exert an effect.
Hypothalamus—A structure within the brain
responsible for a large number of normal functions
throughout the body, including regulating sleep,
temperature, eating, and sexual development. The
hypothalamus also regulates the functions of the
pituitary gland by directing the pituitary to stop or
start production of its hormones.
Pituitary—A gland located at the base of the brain
that produces a number of hormones, including
those that regulate growth and reproductive functions. Overproduction of the pituitary hormone
called growth hormone (GH) is responsible for the
condition known as acromegaly.

Enlarged feet is one deformity caused by acromegaly.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Causes and symptoms
The pituitary is a small gland located at the base of
the brain. A gland is a collection of cells that releases
certain chemicals, or hormones, which are important
to the functioning of other organs or body systems.
The pituitary hormones travel throughout the body
and are involved in a large number of activities,
including the regulation of growth and reproductive
functions. The cause of acromegaly can be traced to
the pituitary’s production of GH.
Under normal conditions, the pituitary receives
input from another brain structure, the hypothalamus,
located at the base of the brain. This input from the
hypothalamus regulates the pituitary’s release of hormones. For example, the hypothalamus produces
growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), which
directs the pituitary to release GH. Input from the
hypothalamus should also direct the pituitary to stop
releasing hormones.
34

In acromegaly, the pituitary continues to release
GH and ignores signals from the hypothalamus. In the
liver, GH causes production of a hormone called insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), which is responsible
for growth throughout the body. When the pituitary
refuses to stop producing GH, the levels of IGF-1 also
reach abnormal peaks. Bones, soft tissue, and organs
throughout the body begin to enlarge, and the body
changes its ability to process and use nutrients like
sugars and fats.
In acromegaly, an individual’s hands and feet begin
to grow, becoming thick and doughy. The jaw line, nose,
and forehead also grow, and facial features are described
as ‘‘coarsening’’. The tongue grows larger, and because
the jaw is larger, the teeth become more widely spaced.
Due to swelling within the structures of the throat
and sinuses, the voice becomes deeper and sounds
more hollow, and patients may develop loud snoring.
Various hormonal changes cause symptoms such as:


heavy sweating



oily skin



increased coarse body hair



improper processing of sugars in the diet (and sometimes actual diabetes)
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

high blood pressure



increased calcium in the urine (sometimes leading to
kidney stones)



increased risk of gallstones; and



swelling of the thyroid gland

People with acromegaly have more skin tags, or
outgrowths of tissue, than normal. This increase in
skin tags is also associated with the development of
growths, called polyps, within the large intestine that
may eventually become cancerous. Patients with acromegaly often suffer from headaches and arthritis. The
various swellings and enlargements throughout the
body may press on nerves, causing sensations of local
tingling or burning, and sometimes result in muscle
weakness.
The most common cause of this disorder (in 90%
of patients) is the development of a noncancerous
tumor within the pituitary, called a pituitary adenoma.
These tumors are the source of the abnormal release of
GH. As these tumors grow, they may press on nearby
structures within the brain, causing headaches and
changes in vision. As the adenoma grows, it may disrupt other pituitary tissue, interfering with the release
of other hormones. These disruptions may be responsible for changes in the menstrual cycle of women,
decreases in the sexual drive in men and women, and
the abnormal production of breast milk in women.
In rare cases, acromegaly is caused by the abnormal
production of GHRH, which leads to the increased
production of GH. Certain tumors in the pancreas,
lungs, adrenal glands, thyroid, and intestine produce
GHRH, which in turn triggers production of an
abnormal quantity of GH.

Diagnosis
Because acromegaly produces slow changes over
time, diagnosis is often significantly delayed. In fact,
the characteristic coarsening of the facial features is
often not recognized by family members, friends, or
long-time family physicians. Often, the diagnosis is
suspected by a new physician who sees the patient for
the first time and is struck by the patient’s characteristic facial appearance. Comparing old photographs
from a number of different time periods will often
increase suspicion of the disease.
Because the quantity of GH produced varies
widely under normal conditions, demonstrating high
levels of GH in the blood is not sufficient to merit a
diagnosis of acromegaly. Instead, laboratory tests measuring an increase of IGF-1 (3-10 times above the
normal level) are useful. These results, however, must
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Acromegaly and gigantism



A comparison of the right hand of a person afflicted
with acromegaly (left) and the hand of a normal sized person.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

be carefully interpreted because normal laboratory
values for IGF-1 vary when the patient is pregnant,
undergoing puberty, elderly, or severely malnourished.
Normal patients will show a decrease in GH production when given a large dose of sugar (glucose). Patients
with acromegaly will not show this decrease, and will
often show an increase in GH production. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is useful for viewing the
pituitary, and for identifying and locating an adenoma.
When no adenoma can be located, the search for a
GHRH-producing tumor in another location begins.

Treatment
The first step in treatment of acromegaly is
removal of all or part of the pituitary adenoma.
Removal requires surgery, usually performed by
entering the skull through the nose. While this surgery
can cause rapid improvement of many acromegaly
symptoms, most patients will also require additional
treatment with medication. Bromocriptine (Parlodel)
is a medication that can be taken by mouth, while
octreotide (Sandostatin) must be injected every eight
hours. Both of these medications are helpful in reducing GH production, but must often be taken for life
and produce their own unique side effects. Some
patients who cannot undergo surgery are treated
with radiation therapy to the pituitary in an attempt
to shrink the adenoma. Radiating the pituitary may
take up to 10 years, however, and may also injure/
destroy other normal parts of the pituitary.

Prognosis
Without treatment, patients with acromegaly will
most likely die early because of the disease’s effects on
35

Actinomycosis

the heart, lungs, brain, or due to the development of
cancer in the large intestine. With treatment, however,
a patient with acromegaly may be able to live a normal
lifespan.
Resources
BOOKS

Biller, Beverly M. K., and Gilbert H. Daniels. ‘‘Growth
Hormone Excess: Acromegaly and Gigantism.’’ In
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, edited by
Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1997.

Biopsy—The process that removes a sample of tissue for microscopic examination to aid in the diagnosis of a disease.
Sinus tract—A narrow, elongated channel in the
body that allows the escape of fluid.

Causes and symptoms

ORGANIZATIONS

Pituitary Tumor Network Association. 16350 Ventura
Blvd., #231, Encino, CA 91436. (805) 499-9973.

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

ACT see Alanine aminotransferase test
ACTH test see Adrenocorticotropic
hormone test
Actinomyces israelii infection see
Actinomycosis

I Actinomycosis
Definition
Actinomycosis is an infection primarily caused by
the bacterium Actinomyces israelii. Infection most
often occurs in the face and neck region and is characterized by the presence of a slowly enlarging, hard,
red lump.

Description
Actinomycosis is a relatively rare infection
occurring in one out of 300,000(1/300,000) people
per year. It is characterized by the presence of a
lump or mass that often forms, draining sinus tracts
to the skin surface. Fifty percent of actinomycosis
cases are of the head and neck region (also called
‘‘lumpy jaw’’ and ‘‘cervicofacial actinomycosis’’),
15% are in the chest, 20% are in the abdomen, and
the rest are in the pelvis, heart, and brain. Men are
three times more likely to develop actinomycosis than
women.

36

KEY TERMS

Actinomycosis is usually caused by the bacterium
Actinomyces israelii. This bacterium is normally present in the mouth but can cause disease if it enters
tissues following an injury. Actinomyces israelii is an
anaerobic bacterium which means it dislikes oxygen
but grows very well in deep tissues where oxygen levels
are low. Tooth extraction, tooth disease, root canal
treatment, jaw surgery, or poor dental hygiene can
allow Actinomyces israelii to cause an infection in the
head and neck region.
The main symptom of cervicofacial actinomycosis
is the presence of a hard lump on the face or neck. The
lump may or may not be red. Fever occurs in some
cases.

Diagnosis
Cervicofacial actinomycosis can be diagnosed by
a family doctor or dentist and the patient may be
referred to an oral surgeon or infectious disease
specialist. The diagnosis of actinomycosis is based
upon several things. The presence of a red lump with
draining sinuses on the head or neck is strongly
suggestive of cervicofacial actinomycosis. A recent
history of tooth extraction or signs of tooth decay or
poor dental hygiene aid in the diagnosis. Microscopic
examination of the fluid draining from the sinuses
shows the characteristic ‘‘sulfur Granules’’ (small
yellow colored material in the fluid) produced by
Actinomyces israelii. A biopsy may be performed to
remove a sample of the infected tissue. This procedure
can be performed under local anesthesia in the doctor’s
office. Occasionally the bacteria can be cultured
from the sinus tract fluid or from samples of the
infected tissue.
Actinomycosis in the lungs, abdomen, pelvis, or
brain can be very hard to diagnose since the symptoms
often mimic those of other diseases. Actinomycosis

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment
Actinomycosis is difficult to treat because of its
dense tissue location. Surgery is often required to
drain the lesion and/or to remove the site of infection. To kill the bacteria, standard therapy has
included large doses of penicillin given through a
vein daily for two to six weeks followed by six to
twelve months of penicillin taken by mouth.
Tetracycline, clindamycin, or erythromycin may be
used instead of penicillin. The antibiotic therapy
must be completed to ensure that the infection
does not return. However, a report in 2004 on
several cases of actinomycosis said that therapy
depends on the individual case and that many
patients today will be diagnosed in earlier stages
of the disease. Sometimes, shorter courses of antibiotic treatment are effective, with close diagnostic
x-ray monitoring. Hyperbaric oxygen (oxygen
under high pressure) therapy in combination with
the antibiotic therapy has been successful.

Prognosis
Complete recovery is achieved following treatment. If left untreated, the infection may cause localized bone destruction.

I Acupressure
Definition
Acupressure is a form of touch therapy that
utilizes the principles of acupuncture and Chinese
medicine. In acupressure, the same points on the
body are used as in acupuncture, but are stimulated
with finger pressure instead of with the insertion of
needles. Acupressure is used to relieve a variety of
symptoms and pain.

Purpose
Acupressure massage performed by a therapist
can be very effective both as prevention and as a
treatment for many health conditions, including
headaches, general aches and pains, colds and flu,
arthritis, allergies, asthma, nervous tension, menstrual cramps, sinus problems, sprains, tennis elbow,
and toothaches, among others. Unlike acupuncture
which requires a visit to a professional, acupressure
can be performed by a layperson. Acupressure techniques are fairly easy to learn, and have been used to
provide quick, cost-free, and effective relief from
many symptoms. Acupressure points can also be
stimulated to increase energy and feelings of wellbeing, reduce stress, stimulate the immune system,
and alleviate sexual dysfunction.

Description
Origins

Prevention
The best prevention is to maintain good dental
hygiene.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Sudhaker, Selvin S., and John J. Rose. ‘‘Short-term
Treatment of Actinomycosis: two Cases and a
Review.’’ Clinical Infectious Diseases (February 1,
2004): 444–448.

Belinda Rowland, PhD
Teresa G. Odle

Activated charcoal see Charcoal, activated
Activated partial thromboplastin time see
Partial thromboplastin time
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

One of the oldest text of Chinese medicine is the
Huang Di, The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine, which may be at least 2,000 years old.
Chinese medicine has developed acupuncture, acupressure, herbal remedies, diet, exercise, lifestyle changes,
and other remedies as part of its healing methods.
Nearly all of the forms of Oriental medicine that are
used in the West today, including acupuncture, acupressure, shiatsu, and Chinese herbal medicine, have
their roots in Chinese medicine. One legend has it that
acupuncture and acupressure evolved as early Chinese
healers studied the puncture wounds of Chinese warriors, noting that certain points on the body created
interesting results when stimulated. The oldest known
text specifically on acupuncture points, the Systematic
Classic of Acupuncture, dates back to 282 A.D.
Acupressure is the non-invasive form of acupuncture,
as Chinese physicians determined that stimulating
points on the body with massage and pressure could
be effective for treating certain problems.
37

Acupressure

of the lungs or abdomen can resemble tuberculosis
or cancer. Diagnostic x-ray results, the presence of
draining sinus tracts, and microscopic analysis
and culturing of infected tissue assist in the diagnosis.

Acupressure
Therapist working acupressure points on a woman’s shoulder. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

Outside of Asian-American communities, Chinese
medicine remained virtually unknown in the United
States until the 1970s, when Richard Nixon became
the first U.S. president to visit China. On Nixon’s trip,
journalists were amazed to observe major operations
being performed on patients without the use of anesthetics. Instead, wide-awake patients were being operated on, with only acupuncture needles inserted into
them to control pain. At that time, a famous columnist
for the New York Times, James Reston, had to
undergo surgery and elected to use acupuncture for
anesthesia. Later, he wrote some convincing stories
on its effectiveness. Despite being neglected by
mainstream medicine and the American Medical
Association (AMA), acupuncture and Chinese medicine became a central to alternative medicine practitioners in the United States. Today, there are millions
of patients who attest to its effectiveness, and nearly
9,000 practitioners in all 50 states.
Acupressure is practiced as a treatment by Chinese
medicine practitioners and acupuncturists, as well as
by massage therapists. Most massage schools in
American include acupressure techniques as part of
38

their bodywork programs. Shiatsu massage is very
closely related to acupressure, working with the same
points on the body and the same general principles,
although it was developed over centuries in Japan
rather than in China. Reflexology is a form of bodywork based on acupressure concepts. Jin Shin Do is a
bodywork technique with an increasing number of
practitioners in America that combines acupressure
and shiatsu principles with qigong, Reichian theory,
and meditation.
Acupressure and Chinese medicine
Chinese medicine views the body as a small part
of the universe, subject to laws and principles of
harmony and balance. Chinese medicine does not
make as sharp a destinction as Western medicine
does between mind and body. The Chinese system
believes that emotions and mental states are every
bit as influential on disease as purely physical
mechanisms, and considers factors like work, environment, and relationships as fundamental to a
patient’s health. Chinese medicine also uses very different symbols and ideas to discuss the body and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Acupoint—A pressure
acupressure.
Chi—Basic life energy.

point

stimulated

in

Meridian—A channel through which chi travels in
the body.
Moxibustion—An acupuncture technique that
burns the herb moxa or mugwort.
Shiatsu—Japanese form of acupressure massage.
Yin/yang—Universal characteristics
describe aspects of the natural world.

used

to

Governing vessel 24.5

health. While Western medicine typically describes
health as mainly physical processes composed of chemical equations and reactions, the Chinese use ideas
like yin and yang, chi, and the organ system to
describe health and the body.

Lung 10

I

II
If/
I

I
I

Stomach 36

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Everything in the universe has properties of
yin and yang. Yin is associated with cold, female,
passive, downward, inward, dark, wet. Yang can be
described as hot, male, active, upward, outward, light,
dry, and so on. Nothing is either completely yin or
yang. These two principles always interact and affect
each other, although the body and its organs can
become imbalanced by having either too much or too
little of either.
Chi (pronounced chee, also spelled qi or ki in
Japanese shiatsu) is the fundamental life energy. It is
found in food, air, water, and sunlight, and it travels
through the body in channels called meridians. There
are 12 major meridians in the body that transport chi,
corresponding to the 12 main organs categorized by
Chinese medicine.
Disease is viewed as an imbalance of the organs
and chi in the body. Chinese medicine has developed
intricate systems of how organs are related to physical
and mental symptoms, and it has devised corresponding treatments using the meridian and pressure point
networks that are classified and numbered. The goal

Press on point governing vessel 24.5, the top of the bridge of
the nose, lightly for two minutes to relieve hay fever symptoms.
Press on lung 10, the center of the thumb pad, for one minute to
alleviate a sore throat. To ease heartburn, apply pressure to
stomach 36, four finger-widths below the kneecap outside the
shinbone. Use on both legs. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators
Group.)

39

Acupressure

KEY TERMS

Acupressure

of acupressure, and acupuncture, is to stimulate and
unblock the circulation of chi, by activating very specific points, called pressure points or acupoints.
Acupressure seeks to stimulate the points on the chi
meridians that pass close to the skin, as these are
easiest to unblock and manipulate with finger
pressure.
Acupressure can be used as part of a Chinese
physician’s prescription, as a session of massage therapy, or as a self-treatment for common aches and illnesses. A Chinese medicine practitioner examines a
patient very thoroughly, looking at physical, mental
and emotional activity, taking the pulse usually at the
wrists, examining the tongue and complexion, and
observing the patient’s demeanor and attitude, to get
a complete diagnosis of which organs and meridian
points are out of balance. When the imbalance is
located, the physician will recommend specific pressure points for acupuncture or acupressure. If acupressure is recommended, the patient might opt for a series
of treatments from a massage therapist.
In massage therapy, acupressurists will evaluate a
patient’s symptoms and overall health, but a massage
therapist’s diagnostic training isn’t as extensive as a
Chinese physician’s. In a massage therapy treatment, a
person usually lies down on a table or mat, with thin
clothing on. The acupressurist will gently feel and
palpate the abdomen and other parts of the body to
determine energy imbalances. Then, the therapist will
work with different meridians throughout the body,
depending on which organs are imbalanced in the
abdomen. The therapist will use different types of
finger movements and pressure on different acupoints,
depending on whether the chi needs to be increased
or dispersed at different points. The therapist observes
and guides the energy flow through the patient’s body
throughout the session. Sometimes, special herbs
(Artemesia vulgaris or moxa) may be placed on a
point to warm it, a process called moxibustion. A session of acupressure is generally a very pleasant experience, and some people experience great benefit
immediately. For more chronic conditions, several
sessions may be necessary to relieve and improve
conditions.
Acupressure massage usually costs from $30–70
per hour session. A visit to a Chinese medicine physician or acupuncturist can be more expensive, comparable to a visit to an allopathic physician if the
practitioner is an MD. Insurance reimbursement varies widely, and consumers should be aware if their
policies cover alternative treatment, acupuncture, or
massage therapy.

40

Self-treatment
Acupressure is easy to learn, and there are many
good books that illustrate the position of acupoints
and meridians on the body. It is also very versatile, as
it can be done anywhere, and it’s a good form of
treatment for spouses and partners to give to each
other and for parents to perform on children for
minor conditions.
While giving self-treatment or performing acupressure on another, a mental attitude of calmness
and attention is important, as one person’s energy
can be used to help another’s. Loose, thin clothing is
recommended. There are three general techniques for
stimulating a pressure point.


Tonifying is meant to strengthen weak chi, and is
done by pressing the thumb or finger into an acupoint with a firm, steady pressure, holding it for up to
two minutes.



Dispersing is meant to move stagnant or blocked
chi, and the finger or thumb is moved in a circular
motion or slightly in and out of the point for two
minutes.



Calming the chi in a pressure point utilizes the palm
to cover the point and gently stroke the area for
about two minutes.

There are many pressure points that are easily
found and memorized to treat common ailments
from headaches to colds.


For headaches, toothaches, sinus problems, and
pain in the upper body, the ‘‘LI4’’ point is recommended. It is located in the web between the thumb
and index finger, on the back of the hand. Using the
thumb and index finger of the other hand, apply a
pinching pressure until the point is felt, and hold it
for two minutes. Pregnant women should never
press this point.



To calm the nerves and stimulate digestion, find the
‘‘CV12’’ point that is four thumb widths above the
navel in the center of the abdomen. Calm the point
with the palm, using gentle stroking for several
minutes.



To stimulate the immune system, find the ‘‘TH5’’
point on the back of the forearm two thumb widths
above the wrist. Use a dispersing technique, or circular pressure with the thumb or finger, for two
minutes on each arm.



For headaches, sinus congestion, and tension, locate
the ‘‘GB20’’ points at the base of the skull in the
back of the head, just behind the bones in back of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Resources

Acupuncture

the ears. Disperse these points for two minutes with
the fingers or thumbs. Also find the ‘‘yintang’’ point,
which is in the middle of the forehead between the
eyebrows. Disperse it with gentle pressure for two
minutes to clear the mind and to relieve headaches.

PERIODICALS

Massage Therapy Journal. 820 Davis Street, Suite100,
Evanston, IL 60201-4444.
OTHER

Precautions
Acupressure is a safe technique, but it is not meant
to replace professional health care. A physician should
always be consulted when there are doubts about
medical conditions. If a condition is chronic, a professional should be consulted; purely symptomatic treatment can exacerbate chronic conditions. Acupressure
should not be applied to open wounds, or where there
is swelling and inflammation. Areas of scar tissue,
blisters, boils, rashes, or varicose veins should be
avoided. Finally, certain acupressure points should
not be stimulated on people with high or low blood
pressure and on pregnant women.

Research and general acceptance
In general, Chinese medicine has been slow to
gain acceptance in the West, mainly because it rests
on ideas very foreign to the scientific model. For
instance, Western scientists have trouble with the
idea of chi, the invisible energy of the body, and the
idea that pressing on certain points can alleviate
certain conditions seems sometimes too simple for
scientists to believe.
Western scientists, in trying to account for the
action of acupressure, have theorized that chi is actually part of the neuroendocrine system of the body.
Celebrated orthopedic surgeon Robert O. Becker,
who was twice nominated for the Nobel Prize, wrote
a book on the subject called Cross Currents: The
Promise of Electromedicine; The Perils of Electropollution. By using precise electrical measuring
devices, Becker and his colleagues showed that the
body has a complex web of electromagnetic energy,
and that traditional acupressure meridians and points
contained amounts of energy that non-acupressure
points did not.
The mechanisms of acupuncture and acupressure remain difficult to document in terms of the
biochemical processes involved; numerous testimonials are the primary evidence backing up the
effectiveness of acupressure and acupuncture.
However, a body of research is growing that verifies the effectiveness in acupressure and acupuncture techniques in treating many problems and in
controlling pain.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

American Association of Oriental Medicine.December 28,
2000. <http://www.aaom.org>.
National Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine Alliance.
December 28, 2000. <http://www.acuall.org>.

Douglas Dupler, MA

Acupressure, foot see Reflexology

I Acupuncture
Definition
Acupuncture is one of the main forms of treatment in traditional Chinese medicine. It involves the
use of sharp, thin needles that are inserted in the body
at very specific points. This process is believed to
adjust and alter the body’s energy flow into healthier
patterns, and is used to treat a wide variety of illnesses
and health conditions.

Purpose
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends acupuncture as an effective treatment for over
forty medical problems, including allergies, respiratory conditions, gastrointestinal disorders, gynecological problems, nervous conditions, and disorders of
the eyes, nose and throat, and childhood illnesses,
among others. Acupuncture has been used in the
treatment of alcoholism and substance abuse. It is
an effective and low-cost treatment for headaches
and chronic pain, associated with problems like
back injuries and arthritis. It has also been used
to supplement invasive Western treatments like
chemotherapy and surgery. Acupuncture is generally
most effective when used as prevention or before a
health condition becomes acute, but it has been used
to help patients suffering from cancer and AIDS.
Acupuncture is limited in treating conditions or
traumas that require surgery or emergency care
(such as for broken bones).
41

Acupuncture
Woman undergoing facial acupuncture. (Photograph by Yoav Levy. Phototake NYC. Reproduced by permission.)

Description
Origins
The original text of Chinese medicine is the Nei
Ching, The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal
Medicine, which is estimated to be at least 2,500 years
old. Thousands of books since then have been written
on the subject of Chinese healing, and its basic philosophies spread long ago to other Asian civilizations.
Nearly all of the forms of Oriental medicine which are
used in the West today, including acupuncture, shiatsu,
acupressure massage, and macrobiotics, are part of or
have their roots in Chinese medicine. Legend has it that
acupuncture developed when early Chinese physicians
observed unpredicted effects of puncture wounds in
Chinese warriors. The oldest known text on acupuncture, the Systematic Classic of Acupuncture, dates back
to 282 A.D. Although acupuncture is its best known
technique, Chinese medicine traditionally utilizes herbal remedies, dietary therapy, lifestyle changes and
other means to treat patients.
In the early 1900s, only a few Western physicians
who had visited China were fascinated by acupuncture,
42

but outside of Asian-American communities it
remained virtually unknown until the 1970s, when
Richard Nixon became the first U.S. president to
visit China. On Nixon’s trip, journalists were amazed
to observe major operations being performed on
patients without the use of anesthetics. Instead,
wide-awake patients were being operated on with
only acupuncture needles inserted into them to control pain. During that time, a famous columnist for
the New York Times, James Reston, had to undergo
surgery and elected to use acupuncture instead of
pain medication, and he wrote some convincing
stories on its effectiveness.
Today, acupuncture is being practiced in all 50
states by over 9,000 practitioners, with over 4,000
MDs including it in their practices. Acupuncture has
shown notable success in treating many conditions,
and over 15 million Americans have used it as a therapy. Acupuncture, however, remains largely unsupported by the medical establishment. The American
Medical Association has been resistant to researching
it, as it is based on concepts very different from the
Western scientific model.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Acupuncture

Governor vessel
Bladder meridian
Triple burner meridian
Conception vessel
Stomach meridian
Large intestine meridian
Small intestine meridian
Gallbladder meridian

Acupuncture sites and meridians on the face and neck. (Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)

KEY TERMS
Acupressure—Form of massage using acupuncture
points.
Auricular acupuncture—Acupuncture using only
points found on the ears.
Chi—Basic life energy.
Meridian—Channel through which chi travels in
the body.
Moxibustion—Acupuncture technique which
burns the herb moxa or mugwort.
Tonification—Acupuncture technique for strengthening the body.
Yin/Yang—Universal characteristics
describe aspects of the natural world.

used

to

Several forms of acupuncture are being used
today in America. Japanese acupuncture uses extremely thin needles and does not incorporate herbal
medicine in its practice. Auricular acupuncture uses
acupuncture points only on the ear, which are
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

believed to stimulate and balance internal organs.
In France, where acupuncture is very popular and
more accepted by the medical establishment, neurologist Paul Nogier developed a system of acupuncture
based on neuroendocrine theory rather than on traditional Chinese concepts, which is gaining some use
in America.
Basic ideas of Chinese medicine
Chinese medicine views the body as a small part
of the universe, and subject to universal laws and
principles of harmony and balance. Chinese medicine
does not draw a sharp line, as Western medicine does,
between mind and body. The Chinese system believes
that emotions and mental states are every bit as
influential on disease as purely physical mechanisms,
and considers factors like work, environment, lifestyle and relationships as fundamental to the overall
picture of a patient’s health. Chinese medicine also
uses very different symbols and ideas to discuss the
body and health. While Western medicine typically
describes health in terms of measurable physical
processes made up of chemical reactions, the Chinese
use ideas like yin and yang, chi, the organ system, and
43

Acupuncture

the five elements to describe health and the body. To
understand the ideas behind acupuncture, it is worthwhile to introduce some of these basic terms.
YIN AND YANG. According to Chinese philosophy,
the universe and the body can be described by two
separate but complementary principles, that of yin
and yang. For example, in temperature, yin is cold
and yang is hot. In gender, yin is female and yang is
male. In activity, yin is passive and yang is active. In
light, yin is dark and yang is bright; in direction yin is
inward and downward and yang is outward and up,
and so on. Nothing is ever completely yin or yang, but
a combination of the two. These two principles are
always interacting, opposing, and influencing each
other. The goal of Chinese medicine is not to eliminate
either yin or yang, but to allow the two to balance each
other and exist harmoniously together. For instance, if
a person suffers from symptoms of high blood pressure,
the Chinese system would say that the heart organ
might have too much yang, and would recommend
methods either to reduce the yang or to increase the
yin of the heart, depending on the other symptoms and
organs in the body. Thus, acupuncture therapies seek to
either increase or reduce yang, or increase or reduce yin
in particular regions of the body.
CHI. Another fundamental concept of Chinese
medicine is that of chi (pronounced chee, also spelled
qi). Chi is the fundamental life energy of the universe.
It is invisible and is found in the environment in the
air, water, food and sunlight. In the body, it is the
invisible vital force that creates and animates life.
We are all born with inherited amounts of chi, and
we also get acquired chi from the food we eat and the
air we breathe. The level and quality of a person’s chi
also depends on the state of physical, mental and
emotional balance. Chi travels through the body
along channels called meridians.
THE ORGAN SYSTEM. In the Chinese system, there
are twelve main organs: the lung, large intestine, stomach, spleen, heart, small intestine, urinary bladder,
kidney, liver, gallbladder, pericardium, and the ‘‘triple
warmer,’’ which represents the entire torso region.
Each organ has chi energy associated with it, and
each organ interacts with particular emotions on the
mental level. As there are twelve organs, there are
twelve types of chi which can move through the body,
and these move through twelve main channels or meridians. Chinese doctors connect symptoms to organs.
That is, symptoms are caused by yin/yang imbalances
in one or more organs, or by an unhealthy flow of chi
to or from one organ to another. Each organ has a
different profile of symptoms it can manifest.

44

THE FIVE ELEMENTS. Another basis of Chinese theory is that the world and body are made up of five
main elements: wood, fire, earth, metal, and water.
These elements are all interconnected, and each element either generates or controls another element. For
instance, water controls fire and earth generates metal.
Each organ is associated with one of the five elements.
The Chinese system uses elements and organs to
describe and treat conditions. For instance, the kidney
is associated with water and the heart is associated
with fire, and the two organs are related as water and
fire are related. If the kidney is weak, then there might
be a corresponding fire problem in the heart, so treatment might be made by acupuncture or herbs to cool
the heart system and/or increase energy in the kidney
system.

The Chinese have developed an intricate system of
how organs and elements are related to physical and
mental symptoms, and the above example is a very
simple one. Although this system sounds suspect to
Western scientists, some interesting parallels have
been observed. For instance, Western medicine has
observed that with severe heart problems, kidney failure often follows, but it still does not know exactly
why. In Chinese medicine, this connection between the
two organs has long been established.
MEDICAL PROBLEMS AND ACUPUNCTURE. In
Chinese medicine, disease as seen as imbalances in
the organ system or chi meridians, and the goal of
any remedy or treatment is to assist the body in reestablishing its innate harmony. Disease can be caused
by internal factors like emotions, external factors like
the environment and weather, and other factors like
injuries, trauma, diet, and germs. However, infection
is seen not as primarily a problem with germs and
viruses, but as a weakness in the energy of the body
which is allowing a sickness to occur. In Chinese medicine, no two illnesses are ever the same, as each body
has its own characteristics of symptoms and balance.
Acupuncture is used to open or adjust the flow of chi
throughout the organ system, which will strengthen
the body and prompt it to heal itself.
A VISIT TO THE ACUPUNCTURIST. The first thing
an acupuncturist will do is get a thorough idea of a
patient’s medical history and symptoms, both physical and emotional. This is done with a long questionnaire and interview. Then the acupuncturist will
examine the patient to find further symptoms, looking closely at the tongue, the pulse at various points
in the body, the complexion, general behavior,
and other signs like coughs or pains. From this, the
practitioner will be able to determine patterns of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Acupuncture needles are always sterilized and
acupuncture is a very safe procedure. The depth of
insertion of needles varies, depending on which chi
channels are being treated. Some points barely go
beyond superficial layers of skin, while some acupuncture points require a depth of 1-3 in (2.5-7.5 cm) of
needle. The needles generally do not cause pain.
Patients sometimes report pinching sensations and
often pleasant sensations, as the body experiences
healing. Depending on the problem, the acupuncturist
might spin or move the needles, or even pass a slight
electrical current through some of them. Moxibustion
may be sometimes used, in which an herbal mixture
(moxa or mugwort) is either burned like incense on the
acupuncture point or on the end of the needle, which
is believed to stimulate chi in a particular way. Also,
acupuncturists sometimes use cupping, during which
small suction cups are placed on meridian points to
stimulate them.
How long the needles are inserted also varies.
Some patients only require a quick in and out insertion to clear problems and provide tonification
(strengthening of health), while some other conditions might require needles inserted up to an hour or
more. The average visit to an acupuncturist takes
about thirty minutes. The number of visits to the
acupuncturist varies as well, with some conditions
improved in one or two sessions and others requiring
a series of six or more visits over the course of weeks
or months.
Costs for acupuncture can vary, depending
on whether the practitioner is an MD. Initial visits
with non-MD acupuncturists can run from $50$100, with follow-up visits usually costing less.
Insurance reimbursement also varies widely, depending on the company and state. Regulations have been
changing often. Some states authorize Medicaid to
cover acupuncture for certain conditions, and some
states have mandated that general coverage pay
for acupuncture. Consumers should be aware of
the provisions for acupuncture in their individual
policies.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Precautions
Acupuncture is generally a very safe procedure. If
a patient is in doubt about a medical condition, more
than one physician should be consulted. Also, a
patient should always feel comfortable and confident
that their acupuncturist is knowledgable and properly
trained.

Research and general acceptance
Mainstream medicine has been slow to accept
acupuncture; although more MDs are using it, the
American Medical Association does not recognize
it as a specialty. The reason for this is that the
mechanism of acupuncture is difficult to scientifically understand or measure, such as the invisible
energy of chi in the body. Western medicine,
admitting that acupuncture works in many cases,
has theorized that the energy meridians are actually part of the nervous system and that acupuncture relieves pain by releasing endorphins, or
natural pain killers, into the bloodstream. Despite
the ambiguity in the biochemistry involved, acupuncture continues to show effectiveness in clinical
tests, from reducing pain to alleviating the symptoms of chronic illnesses, and research in acupuncture is currently growing. The Office of Alternative
Medicine of the National Institute of Health is
currently funding research in the use of acupuncture for treating depression and attention-deficit
disorder.
Resources
PERIODICALS

American Journal of Acupuncture. 1840 41st Ave., Suite 102,
P.O. Box 610, Capitola, CA 95010.
OTHER

American Association of Oriental Medicine. December 28,
2000. <http://www.aaom.org>.
North American Society of Acupuncture and Alternative
Medicine. December 28, 2000. <http://www.
nasa-altmed.com>.

Douglas Dupler, MA

Acute glomerulonephritis see Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
Acute homeopathic remedies see
Homeopathic remedies, acute prescribing
45

Acupuncture

symptoms which indicate which organs and areas
are imbalanced. Depending on the problem, the acupuncturist will insert needles to manipulate chi on
one or more of the twelve organ meridians. On these
twelve meridians, there are nearly 2,000 points which
can be used in acupuncture, with around 200 points
being most frequently used by traditional acupuncturists. During an individual treatment, one to
twenty needles may be used, depending on which
meridian points are chosen.

Acute kidney failure

I Acute kidney failure

KEY TERMS

Definition

Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)—A waste product that
is formed in the liver and collects in the bloodstream; patients with kidney failure have high
BUN levels.
Creatinine—A protein produced by muscle that
healthy kidneys filter out.

Acute kidney failure occurs when illness, infection, or injury damages the kidneys. Temporarily, the
kidneys cannot adequately remove fluids and wastes
from the body or maintain the proper level of certain
kidney-regulated chemicals in the bloodstream.

Extracorporeal—Outside of, or unrelated to, the
body.

Description
The kidneys are the body’s natural filtration
system. They perform the critical task of processing approximately 200 quarts of fluid in the
bloodstream every 24 hours. Waste products like
urea and toxins, along with excess fluids, are
removed from the bloodstream in the form of
urine. Kidney (or renal) failure occurs when kidney
functioning becomes impaired. Fluids and toxins
begin to accumulate in the bloodstream. As fluids
build up in the bloodstream, the patient with acute
kidney failure may become puffy and swollen (edematous) in the face, hands, and feet. Their blood
pressure typically begins to rise, and they may
experience fatigue and nausea.
Unlike chronic kidney failure, which is long
term and irreversible, acute kidney failure is a
temporary condition. With proper and timely treatment, it can typically be reversed. Often there is no
permanent damage to the kidneys. Acute kidney
failure appears most frequently as a complication
of serious illness, like heart failure, liver failure,
dehydration, severe burns, and excessive bleeding
(hemorrhage). It may also be caused by an
obstruction to the urinary tract or as a direct result
of kidney disease, injury, or an adverse reaction to
a medicine.

Causes and symptoms
Acute kidney failure can be caused by many different illnesses, injuries, and infections. These conditions
fall into three main categories: prerenal, postrenal, and
intrarenal conditions.
Prerenal conditions do not damage the kidney,
but can cause diminished kidney function. They are
the most common cause of acute renal failure, and
include:


dehydration



hemorrhage



septicemia, or sepsis

46

Ischemia—A lack of blood supply to an organ or
tissue.
Nephrotoxic—Toxic, or damaging, to the kidney.
Radiocontrast agents—Dyes administered to a
patient for the purposes of a radiologic study.
Sepsis—A bacterial infection of the bloodstream.
Vasopressors—Medications that constrict the
blood vessels.



heart failure



liver failure



burns

Postrenal conditions cause kidney failure by
obstructing the urinary tract. These conditions
include:


inflammation of the prostate gland in men
(prostatitis)



enlargement of the prostate gland (benign prostatic
hypertrophy)



bladder or pelvic tumors



kidney stones (calculi)

Intrarenal conditions involve kidney disease
or direct injury to the kidneys. These conditions
include:


lack of blood supply to the kidneys (ischemia)



use of radiocontrast agents in patients with kidney
problems



drug abuse or overdose



long-term use of nephrotoxic medications, like certain pain medicines



acute inflammation of the glomeruli, or filters, of the
kidney (glomerulonephritis)



kidney infections (pyelitis or pyelonephritis).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE



anemia. The kidneys are responsible for producing
erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone that stimulates red
blood cell production. If kidney disease causes
shrinking of the kidney, red blood cell production is
reduced, leading to anemia.



bad breath or bad taste in mouth. Urea in the saliva
may cause an ammonia-like taste in the mouth.



bone and joint problems. The kidneys produce
vitamin D, which helps the body absorb calcium
and keeps bones strong. For patients with kidney
failure, bones may become brittle. In children,
normal growth may be stunted. Joint pain may
also occur as a result of high phosphate levels
in the blood. Retention of uric acid may cause
gout.



edema. Puffiness or swelling in the arms, hands, feet,
and around the eyes.



frequent urination.



foamy or bloody urine. Protein in the urine may
cause it to foam significantly. Blood in the urine
may indicate bleeding from diseased or obstructed
kidneys, bladder, or ureters.



headaches. High blood pressure may trigger
headaches.



hypertension, or high blood pressure. The retention
of fluids and wastes causes blood volume to increase.
This makes blood pressure rise.



increased fatigue. Toxic substances in the blood and
the presence of anemia may cause the patient to feel
exhausted.



itching. Phosphorus, normally eliminated in the
urine, accumulates in the blood of patients with
kidney failure. An increased phosphorus level may
cause the skin to itch.



lower back pain. Patients suffering from certain kidney problems (like kidney stones and other obstructions) may have pain where the kidneys are located,
in the small of the back below the ribs.



nausea. Urea in the gastric juices may cause upset
stomach.

Diagnosis
Kidney failure is diagnosed by a doctor. A
nephrologist, a doctor that specializes in the kidney, may be consulted to confirm the diagnosis and
recommend treatment options. The patient that is
suspected of having acute kidney failure will have
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

blood and urine tests to determine the level of
kidney function. A blood test will assess the levels
of creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), uric
acid, phosphate, sodium, and potassium. The kidney regulates these agents in the blood. Urine samples will also be collected, usually over a 24-hour
period, to assess protein loss and/or creatinine
clearance.
Determining the cause of kidney failure is critical
to proper treatment. A full assessment of the kidneys
is necessary to determine if the underlying disease
is treatable and if the kidney failure is chronic or
acute. X rays, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
computed tomography scan (CT), ultrasound, renal
biopsy, and/or arteriogram of the kidneys may be
used to determine the cause of kidney failure and
level of remaining kidney function. X rays and ultrasound of the bladder and/or ureters may also be
needed.

Treatment
Treatment for acute kidney failure varies.
Treatment is directed to the underlying, primary medical condition that has triggered kidney failure.
Prerenal conditions may be treated with replacement
fluids given through a vein, diuretics, blood transfusion,
or medications. Postrenal conditions and intrarenal
conditions may require surgery and/or medication.
Frequently, patients in acute kidney failure
require hemodialysis, hemofiltration, or peritoneal
dialysis to filter fluids and wastes from the bloodstream until the primary medical condition can be
controlled.

Hemodialysis
Hemodialysis involves circulating the patient’s
blood outside of the body through an extracorporeal
circuit (ECC), or dialysis circuit. The ECC is made up
of plastic blood tubing, a filter known as a dialyzer (or
artificial kidney), and a dialysis machine that monitors
and maintains blood flow and administers dialysate.
Dialysate is a sterile chemical solution that is used to
draw waste products out of the blood. The patient’s
blood leaves the body through the vein and travels
through the ECC and the dialyzer, where fluid
removal takes place.
During dialysis, waste products in the bloodstream are carried out of the body. At the same time,
electrolytes and other chemicals are added to the
blood. The purified, chemically-balanced blood is
then returned to the body.
47

Acute kidney failure

Common symptoms of acute kidney failure
include:

Acute kidney failure

A dialysis ‘‘run’’ typically lasts three to four hours,
depending on the type of dialyzer used and the physical
condition of the patient. Dialysis is used several times a
week until acute kidney failure is reversed.
Blood pressure changes associated with hemodialysis may pose a risk for patients with heart problems.
Peritoneal dialysis may be the preferred treatment
option in these cases.

Hemofiltration
Hemofiltration, also called continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT), is a slow, continuous
blood filtration therapy used to control acute kidney
failure in critically ill patients. These patients are
typically very sick and may have heart problems or
circulatory problems. They cannot handle the rapid
filtration rates of hemodialysis. They also frequently
need antibiotics, nutrition, vasopressors, and other
fluids given through a vein to treat their primary
condition. Because hemofiltration is continuous,
prescription fluids can be given to patients in kidney
failure without the risk of fluid overload.
Like hemodialysis, hemofiltration uses an ECC.
A hollow fiber hemofilter is used instead of a dialyzer
to remove fluids and toxins. Instead of a dialysis
machine, a blood pump makes the blood flow through
the ECC. The volume of blood circulating through
the ECC in hemofiltration is less than that in hemodialysis. Filtration rates are slower and gentler on the
circulatory system. Hemofiltration treatment will
generally be used until kidney failure is reversed.

Peritoneal dialysis
Peritoneal dialysis may be used if an acute kidney
failure patient is stable and not in immediate crisis.
In peritoneal dialysis (PD), the lining of the patient’s
abdomen, the peritoneum, acts as a blood filter.
A flexible tube-like instrument (catheter) is surgically
inserted into the patient’s abdomen. During treatment, the catheter is used to fill the abdominal cavity
with dialysate. Waste products and excess fluids move
from the patient’s bloodstream into the dialysate
solution. After a certain time period, the waste-filled
dialysate is drained from the abdomen, and replaced
with clean dialysate. There are three type of peritoneal
dialysis, which vary according to treatment time and
administration method.
Peritoneal dialysis is often the best treatment
option for infants and children. Their small size can
make vein access difficult to maintain. It is not recommended for patients with abdominal adhesions or
48

other abdominal defects (like a hernia) that might
reduce the efficiency of the treatment. It is also not
recommended for patients who suffer frequent bouts
of an inflammation of the small pouches in the intestinal tract (diverticulitis).

Prognosis
Because many of the illnesses and underlying
conditions that often trigger acute kidney failure
are critical, the prognosis for these patients many
times is not good. Studies have estimated overall
death rates for acute kidney failure at 42-88%.
Many people, however, die because of the primary
disease that has caused the kidney failure. These
figures may also be misleading because patients
who experience kidney failure as a result of less
serious illnesses (like kidney stones or dehydration)
have an excellent chance of complete recovery.
Early recognition and prompt, appropriate treatment are key to patient recovery.
Up to 10% of patients who experience acute
kidney failure will suffer irreversible kidney damage.
They will eventually go on to develop chronic kidney
failure or end-stage renal disease. These patients will
require long-term dialysis or kidney transplantation to
replace their lost renal functioning.

Prevention
Since acute kidney failure can be caused by many
things, prevention is difficult. Medications that may
impair kidney function should be given cautiously.
Patients with pre-existing kidney conditions who are
hospitalized for other illnesses or injuries should be
carefully monitored for kidney failure complications.
Treatments and procedures that may put them at risk
for kidney failure (like diagnostic tests requiring radiocontrast agents or dyes) should be used with extreme
caution.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Stark, June. ‘‘Dialysis Choices: Turning the Tide in Acute
Renal Failure.’’ Nursing 27, no. 2 (February 1997):
41-8.
ORGANIZATIONS

National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St., New York,
NY 10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.

Paula Anne Ford-Martin

Acute leukemias see Leukemias, acute
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Definition
Acute lymphangitis is a bacterial infection in the
lymphatic vessels which is characterized by painful,
red streaks below the skin surface. This is a potentially
serious infection which can rapidly spread to the
bloodstream and be fatal.

Description
Acute lymphangitis affects a critical member of
the immune system–the lymphatic system. Waste
materials from nearly every organ in the body drain
into the lymphatic vessels and are filtered in small
organs called lymph nodes. Foreign bodies, such as
bacteria or viruses, are processed in the lymph nodes
to generate an immune response to fight an infection.
In acute lymphangitis, bacteria enter the body
through a cut, scratch, insect bite, surgical wound, or
other skin injury. Once the bacteria enter the lymphatic system, they multiply rapidly and follow the lymphatic vessel like a highway. The infected lymphatic
vessel becomes inflamed, causing red streaks that are
visible below the skin surface. The growth of the bacteria occurs so rapidly that the immune system does
not respond fast enough to stop the infection.
If left untreated, the bacteria can cause tissue
destruction in the area of the infection. A pus-filled,
painful lump called an abscess may be formed in the
infected area. Cellulitis, a generalized infection of
the lower skin layers, may also occur. In addition,
the bacteria may invade the bloodstream and cause
septicemia. Lay people, for that reason, often call
the red streaks seen in the skin ‘‘blood poisoning.’’
Septicemia is a very serious illness and may be fatal.

Causes and symptoms
Acute lymphangitis is most often caused by the
bacterium Streptococcus pyogenes. This potentially
dangerous bacterium also causes strep throat, infections of the heart, spinal cord, and lungs, and in the
1990s has been called the ‘‘flesh-eating bacterium.’’
Staphylococci bacteria may also cause lymphangitis.
Although anyone can develop lymphangitis, some
people are more at risk. People who have had radical
mastectomy (removal of a breast and nearby lymph
nodes), a leg vein removed for coronary bypass surgery, or recurrent lymphangitis caused by tinea pedis
(a fungal infection on the foot) are at an increased risk
for lymphangitis.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

KEY TERMS
Biopsy—The process which removes a sample of
diseased or infected tissue for microscopic examination to aid in diagnosis.
Lymphatic system—A component of the immune
system consisting of vessels and nodes. Waste
materials from organs drain into the lymphatic vessels and are filtered by the lymph nodes.
Septicemia—Disease caused by the presence and
growth of bacteria in the bloodstream.

The characteristic symptoms of acute lymphangitis are the wide, red streaks which travel from the site
of infection to the armpit or groin. The affected areas
are red, swollen, and painful. Blistering of the affected
skin may occur. The bacterial infection causes a fever
of 100-104 8F (38-40 8C). In addition, a general ill
feeling, muscle aches, headache, chills, and loss of
appetite may be felt.

Diagnosis
If lymphangitis is suspected, the person should
call his or her doctor immediately or go to an emergency room. Acute lymphangitis could be diagnosed
by the family doctor, infectious disease specialist,
or an emergency room doctor. The painful, red
streaks just below the skin surface and the high
fever are diagnostic of acute lymphangitis. A sample
of blood would be taken for culture to determine
whether the bacteria have entered the bloodstream.
A biopsy (removal of a piece of infected tissue)
sample may be taken for culture to identify which
type of bacteria is causing the infection. Diagnosis is
immediate because it is based primarily on the symptoms. Most insurance policies should cover the
expenses for the diagnosis and treatment of acute
lymphangitis.

Treatment
Because of the serious nature of this infection, treatment would begin immediately even before the bacterial
culture results were available. The only treatment for
acute lymphangitis is to give very large doses of an
antibiotic, usually penicillin, through the vein. Growing streptococcal bacteria are usually eliminated rapidly
and easily by penicillin. The antibiotic clindamycin may
be included in the treatment to kill any streptococci
which are not growing and are in a resting state.
49

Acute lymphangitis

I Acute lymphangitis

Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis

Alternatively, a ‘‘broad spectrum’’ antibiotic may be
used which would kill many different kinds of bacteria.

KEY TERMS
Streptococcus—A gram-positive, round or oval
bacteria in the genus Streptococcus. Group A streptococci cause a number of human diseases including strep throat, impetigo, and ASPGN.

Prognosis
Complete recovery is expected if antibiotic treatment is begun at an early stage of the infection.
However, if untreated, acute lymphangitis can be a
very serious and even deadly disease. Acute lymphangitis that goes untreated can spread, causing tissue
damage. Extensive tissue damage would need to be
repaired by plastic surgery. Spread of the infection
into the bloodstream could be fatal.

Prevention
Although acute lymphangitis can occur in anyone, good hygiene and general health may help to
prevent infections.

one to six weeks (average two weeks) after the streptococcal infection.
APSGN is a relatively uncommon disease affecting about one of every 10,000 people, although four or
five times that many may actually be affected by it
but show no symptoms. APSGN is most prevalent
among boys between the ages of 3 and 7, but it can
occur at any age.

Causes and symptoms

Resources
PERIODICALS

Dajer, Tony. ‘‘A Lethal Scratch.’’ Discover (February 1998):
34-7.

Belinda Rowland, PhD

Acute pericarditis see Pericarditis

poststreptococcal
I Acute
glomerulonephritis
Definition
Acute
poststreptococcal
glomerulonephritis
(APSGN) is an inflammation of the kidney tubules
(glomeruli) that filter waste products from the blood,
following a streptococcal infection such as strep
throat. APSGN is also called postinfectious
glomerulonephritis.

Description
APSGN develops after certain streptococcal
bacteria (group A beta-hemolytic streptococci) have
infected the skin or throat. Antigens from the dead
streptococci clump together with the antibodies that
killed them. These clumps are trapped in the kidney
tubules, cause the tubules to become inflamed, and
impair that organs’ ability to filter and eliminate
body wastes. The onset of APSGN usually occurs
50

Frequent sore throats and a history of streptococcal infection increase the risk of acquiring APSGN.
Symptoms of APSGN include:


fluid accumulation and tissue swelling (edema)
initially in the face and around the eyes, later in
the legs



low urine output (oliguria)



blood in the urine (hematuria)



protein in the urine (proteinuria)



high blood pressure



joint pain or stiffness

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of APSGN is made by taking the
patient’s history, assessing his/her symptoms, and
performing certain laboratory tests. Urinalysis
usually shows blood and protein in the urine.
Concentrations of urea and creatinine (two waste
products normally filtered out of the blood by the
kidneys) in the blood are often high, indicating
impaired kidney function. A reliable, inexpensive
blood test called the anti-streptolysin-O test can
confirm that a patient has or has had a streptococcal infection. A throat culture may also show the
presence of group A beta-hemolytic streptococci.

Treatment
Treatment of ASPGN is designed to relieve the
symptoms and prevent complications. Some patients
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

KEY TERMS
Depersonalization—A dissociative symptom in
which the patient feels that his or her body is
unreal, is changing, or is dissolving.
Derealization—A dissociative symptom in which
the external environment is perceived as unreal.

Prognosis

Dissociation—A reaction to trauma in which the
mind splits off certain aspects of the trauma from conscious awareness. Dissociation can affect the patient’s memory, sense of reality, and sense of identity.

Most children (up to 95%) fully recover from
APSGN in a matter of weeks or months. Most adults
(up to 70%) also recover fully. In those who do
not recover fully, chronic or progressive problems of
kidney function may occur. Kidney failure may result
in some patients.

Trauma—In the context of ASD, a disastrous or
life-threatening event.

Description

Prevention
Receiving prompt treatment for streptococcal
infections may prevent APSGN.
Resources

Acute stress disorder is a new diagnostic category
that was introduced in 1994 to differentiate time-limited reactions to trauma from post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD).

BOOKS

Fauci, Anthony S., et al., editors. Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
ORGANIZATIONS

American Kidney Fund (AKF). Suite 1010, 6110 Executive
Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852. (800) 638-8299.
<http://216.248.130.102/Default.htm>.
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St., New
York, NY 10016. (800) 622-9010.<http://
www.kidney.org>.

Maureen Haggerty

Acute respiratory distress syndrome see
Adult respiratory distress syndrome

I Acute stress disorder
Definition
Acute stress disorder (ASD) is an anxiety disorder
characterized by a cluster of dissociative and anxiety
symptoms occurring within one month of a traumatic
event. (Dissociation is a psychological reaction to
trauma in which the mind tries to cope by ‘‘sealing
off ’’ some features of the trauma from conscious
awareness).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Causes and symptoms
Acute stress disorder is caused by exposure to
trauma, which is defined as a stressor that causes
intense fear and, usually, involves threats to life or
serious injury to oneself or others. Examples are
rape, mugging, combat, natural disasters, etc.
The symptoms of stress disorder include a combining of one or more dissociative and anxiety symptoms with the avoidance of reminders of the traumatic
event. Dissociative symptoms include emotional
detachment, temporary loss of memory, depersonalization, and derealization.
Anxiety symptoms connected with acute stress
disorder include irritability, physical restlessness,
sleep problems, inability to concentrate, and being
easily startled.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of acute stress disorder is based on a
combination of the patient’s history and a physical
examination to rule out diseases that can cause
anxiety. The essential feature is a traumatic event
within one month of the onset of symptoms. Other
diagnostic criteria include:


The symptoms significantly interfere with normal
social or vocational functioning



The symptoms last between two days and four weeks.
51

Acute stress disorder

are advised to stay in bed until they feel better and
to restrict fluid and salt intake. Antibiotics may be
prescribed to kill any lingering streptococcal bacteria,
if their presence is confirmed. Antihypertensives may
be given to help control high blood pressure and
diuretics may be used to reduce fluid retention and
swelling. Kidney dialysis is rarely needed.

Addiction

Treatment
Treatment for acute stress disorder usually
includes a combination of antidepressant medications
and short-term psychotherapy.

Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery is influenced by the
severity and duration of the trauma, the patient’s
closeness to it, and the patient’s previous level of functioning. Favorable signs include a short time period
between the trauma and onset of symptoms, immediate
treatment, and appropriate social support. If the
patient’s symptoms are severe enough to interfere
with normal life and have lasted longer than one
month, the diagnosis may be changed to PTSD. If the
symptoms have lasted longer than one month but are
not severe enough to meet the definition of PTSD, the
diagnosis may be changed to adjustment disorder.
Patients who do not receive treatment for acute
stress disorder are at increased risk for substance abuse
or major depressive disorders.

Prevention
Traumatic events cannot usually be foreseen and,
thus, cannot be prevented. However, in theory, professional intervention soon after a major trauma might
reduce the likelihood or severity of ASD. In addition,
some symptoms of acute stress disorder result from
biochemical changes in the central nervous system,
muscles, and digestive tract that are not subject to
conscious control.
Resources
BOOKS

Corbman, Gene R. ‘‘Anxiety Disorders.’’ In Current
Diagnosis, edited by Rex B. Conn, et al. Vol. 9.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997.
Eisendrath, Stuart J. ‘‘Psychiatric Disorders.’’ In Current
Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998, edited by
Stephen McPhee, et al., 37th ed. Stamford: Appleton &
Lange, 1997.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD

Acute stress gastritis see Gastritis
Acute transverse myelitis see Transverse
myelitis
Acyclovir see Antiviral drugs
52

I Addiction
Definition
Addiction is a persistent, compulsive dependence
on a behavior or substance. The term has been partially replaced by the word dependence for substance
abuse. Addiction has been extended, however, to
include mood-altering behaviors or activities. Some
researchers speak of two types of addictions: substance addictions (for example, alcoholism, drug
abuse, and smoking); and process addictions (for
example, gambling, spending, shopping, eating, and
sexual activity). There is a growing recognition that
many addicts, such as polydrug abusers, are addicted
to more than one substance or process.

Description
Addiction is one of the most costly public
health problems in the United States. It is a progressive syndrome, which means that it increases in
severity over time unless it is treated. Substance
abuse is characterized by frequent relapse, or return
to the abused substance. Substance abusers often
make repeated attempts to quit before they are
successful.
The economic cost of substance abuse in the
United States exceeds $414 billion, with health care
costs attributed to substance abuse estimated at more
than $114 billion.
By eighth grade, 52% of adolescents have consumed alcohol, 41% have smoked tobacco, and 20%
have smoked marijuana. Compared to females, males
are almost four times as likely to be heavy drinkers,
nearly one and a half more likely to smoke a pack or
more of cigarettes daily, and twice as likely to smoke
marijuana weekly. However, among adolescents
these gender differences are not as pronounced and
girls are almost as likely to abuse substances such
as alcohol and cigarettes. Although frequent use
of tobacco, cocaine and heavy drinking appears
to remain stable in the 1990s, marijuana use has
increased.
An estimated four million Americans over the age
of 12 used prescription pain relievers, sedatives, and
stimulants for ‘‘nonmedical’’ reasons during one
month.
In the United States, 25% of the population regularly uses tobacco. Tobacco use reportedly kills 2.5
times as many people each year as alcohol and drug
abuse combined. According to data from the World
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Addictive personality—A concept that was formerly used to explain addiction as the result of
pre-existing character defects in individuals.
Process addiction—Addiction to certain moodaltering behaviors, such as eating disorders, gambling, sexual activity, overwork, and shopping.
Tolerance—A condition in which an addict needs
higher doses of a substance to achieve the same
effect previously achieved with a lower dose.
Withdrawal—The unpleasant, sometimes lifethreatening physiological changes that occur, due
to the discontinuation of use of some drugs after
prolonged, regular use.

Causes and symptoms
Addiction to substances results from the interaction of several factors:
Drug chemistry
Some substances are more addictive than others,
either because they produce a rapid and intense
change in mood; or because they produce painful
withdrawal symptoms when stopped suddenly.
Crack users. Crack, a form of cocaine, is one of the most
addictive drugs. (Photograph by Roy Marsch, The Stock
Market. Reproduced by permission.)

Health Organization, there were 1.1 billion smokers
worldwide and 10,000 tobacco-related deaths per
day. Furthermore, in the United States, 43% of children aged 2-11 years are exposed to environmental
tobacco smoke, which has been implicated in sudden
infant death syndrome, low birth weight, asthma, middle ear disease, pneumonia, cough, and upper respiratory infection.
Eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, and binge eating, affect more than
five million American women and men. Fifteen percent of young women have substantially disordered
attitudes toward eating and eating behaviors. More
than 1,000 women die each year from anorexia
nervosa.
A Harvard study found that an estimated 15.4
million Americans suffered from a gambling addiction.
More than one-half (7.9 million) were adolescents.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Genetic factor
Some people appear to be more vulnerable to
addiction because their body chemistry increases
their sensitivity to drugs. Some forms of substance
abuse and dependence seem to run in families; and
this may be the result of a genetic predisposition,
environmental influences, or a combination of both.
Brain structure and function
Using drugs repeatedly over time changes brain
structure and function in fundamental and long-lasting ways. Addiction comes about through an array of
changes in the brain and the strengthening of new
memory connections. Evidence suggests that those
long-lasting brain changes are responsible for the distortions of cognitive and emotional functioning that
characterize addicts, particularly the compulsion to
use drugs. Although the causes of addiction remain
the subject of ongoing debate and research, many
experts now consider addiction to be a brain disease:
a condition caused by persistent changes in brain
structure and function. However, having this brain
53

Addiction

KEY TERMS

Addiction

disease does not absolve the addict of responsibility
for his or her behavior, but it does explain why many
addicts cannot stop using drugs by sheer force of will
alone.
Scientists may have come closer to solving the
brain’s specific involvement in addiction in 2004.
Psychiatrists say they have found the craving center
of the brain that triggers relapse in addicts. The anterior cingulated cortex in the frontal lobe of the brain is
the area responsible for long-term craving in addicts.
Knowing the area of the brain from which long-term
cravings come may help scientists pinpoint therapies.
Social learning
Social learning is considered the most important
single factor in addiction. It includes patterns of use in
the addict’s family or subculture, peer pressure, and
advertising or media influence.
Availability
Inexpensive or readily available tobacco, alcohol,
or drugs produce marked increases in rates of
addiction.
Individual development
Before the 1980s, the so-called addictive personality was used to explain the development of addiction. The addictive personality was described as
escapist, impulsive, dependent, devious, manipulative,
and self-centered. Many doctors now believe that
these character traits develop in addicts as a result of
the addiction, rather than the traits being a cause of
the addiction.

Diagnosis
In addition to a preoccupation with using and
acquiring the abused substance, the diagnosis of
addiction is based on five criteria:


loss of willpower



harmful consequences



unmanageable lifestyle



tolerance or escalation of use



withdrawal symptoms upon quitting

group psychotherapy is often helpful, but only after
substance use has stopped. Anti-addiction medications,
such as methadone and naltrexone, are also commonly
used. A new treatment option has been developed that
allows family physicians to treat heroine addiction
from their offices rather than sending patients to
methadone clinics. The drug is called buprenorphine
(Suboxone).
Researchers continue to work to identify workable pharmacological treatments for various addictions. In 2004, clinical trials were testing a number of
drugs currently in use for other diseases and conditions to see if they could be used to treat addiction.
This would speed up their approval by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA). For example,
cocaine withdrawal is eased by boosting dopamine
levels in the brain, so scientists are studying drugs
that boost dopamine, such as Ritalin, which is used
to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and
amantadine, a drug used for flu and Parkinson’s
diease.
The most frequently recommended social form of
outpatient treatment is the twelve-step program. Such
programs are also frequently combined with psychotherapy. According to a recent study reported
by the American Psychological Association (APA),
anyone, regardless of his or her religious beliefs or
lack of religious beliefs, can benefit from participation
in 12-step programs such as Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) or Narcotics Anonymous (NA). The number of
visits to 12-step self-help groups exceeds the number of
visits to all mental health professionals combined.
There are twelve-step groups for all major substance
and process addictions.
The Twelve Steps are:


Admit powerlessness over the addiction.



Believe that a Power greater than oneself could
restore sanity.



Make a decision to turn your will and your life over
to the care of God, as you understand him.



Make a searching and fearless moral inventory of
self.



Admit to God, yourself, and another human being
the exact nature of your wrongs.



Become willing to have God remove all these defects
from your character.



Humbly ask God to remove shortcomings.



Make a list of all persons harmed by your wrongs
and become willing to make amends to them all.

Treatment
Treatment requires both medical and social
approaches. Substance addicts may need hospital treatment to manage withdrawal symptoms. Individual or
54

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Make direct amends to such people, whenever possible except when to do so would injure them or others.



Continue to take personal inventory and promptly
admit any future wrongdoings.



Seek to improve contact with a God of the individual’s understanding through meditation and prayer.



Carry the message of spiritual awakening to others
and practice these principles in all your affairs.

Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery from any addiction
depends on the substance or process, the individual’s
circumstances, and underlying personality structure.
Polydrug users have the worst prognosis for recovery.

American Psychiatric Association.
<http://www.pscyh.org>.
Center for On-Line Addiction.
<http://www.netaddiction.com>.
eGambling: Electronic Joural of Gambling Issues.
<http://www.camh.net/egambling/main.html>.
National Alliance on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence,
Inc. 12 West 21st St., New York, NY 10010. (212)
206-6770.
National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at
Columbia University.
<http://www.casacolumbia.org>.
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information.
<http://www.health.org>.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA). 6000 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-7003. <http://www.niaaa.nih.gov>.

Bill Asenjo, MS, CRC
Teresa G. Odle

Prevention
The most effective form of prevention appears to
be a stable family that models responsible attitudes
toward mood-altering substances and behaviors.
Prevention education programs are also widely used
to inform the public of the harmfulness of substance
abuse.

I Addison’s disease
Definition

Resources
BOOKS

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Substance Abuse: The
Nation’s #1 Problem. Princeton, N.J., 2001.
PERIODICALS

Kalivas, Peter. ‘‘Drug Addiction: To the Cortex . . . and
Beyond.’’ The American Journal of Psychiatry 158, no. 3
(March 2001).
Kelly, Timothy. ‘‘Addiction: A Booming $800 Billion
Industry.’’ The World and I (July 1, 2000).
Leshner, Alan. ‘‘Addiction is a Brain Disease.’’ Issues in
Science and Technology 17, no. 3 (April 1, 2001).
‘‘A New Office-based Treatment for Prescription Drug and
Heroin Addiction.’’ Biotech Week (August 4, 2004):
219.
‘‘Research Brief: Source of Addiction Identified.’’ GP (July
19, 2004): 4.
‘‘Scientists May Use Existing Drugs to Stop Addiction.’’
Life Science Weekly (Sepember 21, 2004): 1184.
ORGANIZATIONS

Al-Anon Family Groups. Box 182, Madison Square Station,
New York, NY 10159. <http://www.Al-Anon
Alateen.org>.
Alcoholics Anonymous World Services, Inc. Box 459,
Grand Central Station, New York, NY 10163. <http://
www.alcoholics-anonymous.org>.
American Anorexia Bulimina Association.
<http://www.aabainc.org>.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Addison’s disease is a disorder involving disrupted functioning of the part of the adrenal gland
called the cortex. This results in decreased production
of two important chemicals (hormones) normally
released by the adrenal cortex: cortisol and
aldosterone.

Description
The adrenals are two glands, each perched on the
upper part of the two kidneys. The outer part of the
gland is known as the cortex; the inner part is known
as the medulla. Each of these parts of the adrenal
gland is responsible for producing different types of
hormones.
Cortisol is a very potent hormone produced by the
adrenal cortex. It is involved in regulating the functioning of nearly every type of organ and tissue
throughout the body, and is considered to be one of
the few hormones absolutely necessary for life.
Cortisol is involved in:


the very complex processing and utilization of many
nutrients, including sugars (carbohydrates), fats, and
proteins



the normal functioning of the circulatory system and
the heart
55

Addison’s disease



Addison’s disease



the functioning of muscles



normal kidney function



production of blood cells



the normal processes involved in maintaining the
skeletal system



proper functioning of the brain and nerves



the normal responses of the immune system

Aldosterone, also produced by the adrenal cortex,
plays a central role in maintaining the appropriate
proportions of water and salts in the body. When
this balance is upset, the volume of blood circulating
throughout the body will fall dangerously low, accompanied by a drop in blood pressure.
Addison’s disease is also called primary adrenocortical insufficiency. In other words, some process
interferes directly with the ability of the adrenal cortex
to produce its hormones. Levels of both cortisol and
aldosterone drop, and numerous functions throughout the body are disrupted.
Addison’s disease occurs in about four in every
100,000 people. It strikes both men and women of all
ages.

Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of Addison’s disease is
the destruction and/or shrinking (atrophy) of the adrenal cortex. In about 70% of all cases, this atrophy is
believed to occur due to an autoimmune disorder. In an
autoimmune disorder, the immune system of the body,
responsible for identifying foreign invaders such as
viruses or bacteria and killing them, accidentally begins
to identify the cells of the adrenal cortex as foreign,
and destroy them. In about 20% of all cases, destruction of the adrenal cortex is caused by tuberculosis. The
remaining cases of Addison’s disease may be caused
by fungal infections, such as histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis, and cryptococcosis, which affect the adrenal
gland by producing destructive, tumor-like masses
called granulomas; a disease called amyloidosis, in
which a starchy substance called amyloid is deposited
in abnormal places throughout the body, interfering
with the function of whatever structure it is present
within; or invasion of the adrenal glands by cancer.
In about 75% of all patients, Addison’s disease
tends to be a very gradual, slowly developing disease.
Significant symptoms are not noted until about
90% of the adrenal cortex has been destroyed. The
most common symptoms include fatigue and loss
of energy, decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, muscle weakness,
56

KEY TERMS
Gland—A collection of cells whose function is to
release certain chemicals, or hormones, which are
important to the functioning of other, sometimes
distantly located, organs or body systems.
Hormone—A chemical produced in one part of the
body, which travels to another part of the body in
order to exert its effect.

dizziness when standing, dehydration, unusual areas of
darkened (pigmented) skin, and dark freckling. As the
disease progresses, the patient may appear to have
very tanned, or bronzed skin, with darkening of the
lining of the mouth, vagina, and rectum, and dark
pigmentation of the area around the nipples (aereola). As dehydration becomes more severe, the
blood pressure will continue to drop and the patient
will feel increasingly weak and light-headed. Some
patients have psychiatric symptoms, including
depression and irritability. Women lose pubic and
underarm hair, and stop having normal menstrual
periods.
When a patient becomes ill with an infection,
or stressed by an injury, the disease may suddenly and
rapidly progress, becoming life-threatening. Symptoms
of this ‘‘Addisonian crisis’’ include abnormal heart
rhythms, severe pain in the back and abdomen,
uncontrollable nausea and vomiting, a drastic drop in
blood pressure, kidney failure, and unconsciousness.
About 25% of all Addison’s disease patients are
identified due to the development of Addisonian crisis.

Diagnosis
Many patients do not recognize the slow progression of symptoms and the disease is ultimately identified when a physician notices the areas of increased
pigmentation of the skin. Once suspected, a number
of blood tests can lead to the diagnosis of Addison’s
disease. It is not sufficient to demonstrate low blood
cortisol levels, as normal levels of cortisol vary quite
widely. Instead, patients are given a testing dose of
another hormone called corticotropin (ACTH).
ACTH is produced in the body by the pituitary
gland, and normally acts by promoting growth
within the adrenal cortex and stimulating the production and release of cortisol. In Addison’s disease,
even a dose of synthetic ACTH does not increase
cortisol levels.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment
Treatment of Addison’s disease involves replacing the missing or low levels of cortisol. In the case
of Addisonian crisis, this will be achieved by injecting
a potent form of steroid preparation through a needle
placed in a vein (intravenous or IV). Dehydration
and salt loss will also be treated by administering
carefully balanced solutions through the IV.
Dangerously low blood pressure may require special
medications to safely elevate it until the steroids take
effect.
Patients with Addison’s disease will need to take a
steroid preparation (hydrocortisone) and a replacement for aldosterone (fludrocortisone) by mouth for
the rest of their lives. When a patient has an illness
which causes nausea and vomiting (such that they
cannot hold down their medications), he or she will
need to enter a medical facility where IV medications
can be administered. When a patient has any kind of
infection or injury, the normal dose of hydrocortisone
will need to be doubled.

I Adenoid hyperplasia
Definition
Adenoid hyperplasia is the overenlargement of
the lymph glands located above the back of the mouth.

Description
Located at the back of the mouth above and
below the soft palate are two pairs of lymph glands.
The tonsils below are clearly visible behind the back
teeth; the adenoids lie just above them and are hidden
from view by the palate. Together these four arsenals
of immune defense guard the major entrance to the
body from foreign invaders–the germs we breathe and
eat. In contrast to the rest of the body’s tissues, lymphoid tissue reaches its greatest size in mid-childhood
and recedes thereafter. In this way children are best
able to develop the immunities they need to survive in
a world full of infectious diseases.
Beyond its normal growth pattern, lymphoid tissue grows excessively (hypertrophies) during an acute
infection, as it suddenly increases its immune activity
to fight off the invaders. Often it does not completely
return to its former size. Each subsequent infection
leaves behind a larger set of tonsils and adenoids. To
make matters worse, the sponge-like structure of these
hypertrophied glands can produce safe havens for
germs where the body cannot reach and eliminate
them. Before antibiotics and the reduction in infectious
childhood diseases over the past few generations, tonsils and adenoids caused greater health problems.

Prognosis
Prognosis for patients appropriately treated with
hydrocortisone and aldosterone is excellent. These
patients can expect to enjoy a normal lifespan. Without
treatment, or with substandard treatment, patients
are always at risk of developing Addisonian crisis.
Resources
BOOKS

Williams, Gordon H., and Robert G. Dluhy.
‘‘Hypofunction of the Adrenal Cortex.’’ In Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, edited by Anthony
S.Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
ORGANIZATIONS

National Adrenal Disease Foundation. 505 Northern
Boulevard, Suite 200, Great Neck, NY 11021. (516)
487-4992.

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Causes and symptoms
Most tonsil and adenoid hypertrophy is simply
caused by the normal growth pattern for that type of
tissue. Less often, the hypertrophy is due to repeated
throat infections by cold viruses, strep throat, mononucleosis, and in times gone by, diphtheria. The acute
infections are usually referred to as tonsillitis, the adenoids getting little recognition because they cannot be
seen without special instruments. Symptoms include
painful, bright red, often ulcerated tonsils, enlargement of lymph nodes (glands) beneath the jaw, fever,
and general discomfort.
After the acute infection subsides, symptoms are
generated simply by the size of the glands. Extremely
large tonsils can impair breathing and swallowing,
although that is quite rare. Large adenoids can impair
nose breathing and require a child to breathe through
the mouth. Because they encircle the only connection
57

Adenoid hyperplasia

To distinguish between primary adrenocortical
insufficiency (Addison’s disease) and secondary adrenocortical insufficiency (caused by failure of the pituitary to produce enough ACTH), levels of ACTH in
the blood are examined. Normal or high levels of
ACTH indicate that the pituitary is working properly,
but the adrenal cortex is not responding normally
to the presence of ACTH. This confirms the diagnosis
of Addison’s disease.

Adenovirus infections

KEY TERMS
Eustacian tube—A tube connecting the middle ear
with the back of the nose, allowing air pressure to
equalize within the ear whenever it opens, such as
with yawning.
Hyperplastic—Overgrown.
Hypertrophy—Overgrowth.
Strep throat—An infection of the throat caused by
bacteria of the Streptococcus family, which causes
tonsillitis.
Ulcerated—Damaged so that the surface tissue is
lost and/or necrotic (dead).

contribution to optimal function in the tonsils and
adenoids. Food allergies are often the culprits for
recurring ear infections, as well as tonsilitis and adenoiditis. Identification and removal of the allergic
food(s) can greatly assist in alleviating the cause of
the problem. Acute tonsillitis also benefits from
warm saline gargles.

Prognosis
Hypertrophied adenoids are a normal part of
growing up and should be respected for their important role in the development of immunity. Only when
their size causes problems by obstructing breathing or
middle ear drainage do they demand intervention.

Prevention
between the middle ear and the eustachian tube,
hypertrophied adenoids can also obstruct it and
cause middle ear infections.

Diagnosis
A simple tongue blade depressing the tongue
allows an adequate view of the tonsils. Enlarged tonsils may have deep pockets (crypts) containing dead
tissue (necrotic debris). Viewing adenoids requires a
small mirror or fiberoptic scope. A child with recurring
middle ear infections may well have large adenoids. A
throat culture or mononucleosis test will usually reveal
the identity of the germ.

Treatment
It used to be standard practice to remove tonsils
and/or adenoids after a few episodes of acute throat or
ear infection. The surgery is called tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy (T and A). Opinion changed as it was
realized that this tissue is beneficial to the development
of immunity. For instance, children without tonsils
and adenoids produce only half the immunity to oral
polio vaccine. In addition, treatment of ear and throat
infections with antibiotics and of recurring ear infections with surgical drainage through the ear drum
(tympanostomy) has greatly reduced the incidence of
surgical removal of these lymph glands.

Alternative treatment
There are many botanical/herbal remedies that
can be used alone or in formulas to locally assist the
tonsils and adenoids in their immune function at the
opening of the oral cavity and to tone these glands.
Keeping the Eustachian tubes open is an important
58

Prevention can be directed toward prompt evaluation and appropriate treatment of sore throats to prevent overgrowth of adenoid tissue. Avoiding other
children with acute respiratory illness will also reduce
the spread of these common illnesses.
Resources
BOOKS

Behman, Richard E., editor. ‘‘Tonsils and Adenoids.’’ In
Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. Philadelphia: W. B.
Saunders Co., 1996.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Adenoid hypertrophy see Adenoid
hyperplasia
Adenoid removal see Tonsillectomy
and adenoidectomy
Adenoidectomy see Tonsillectomy
and adenoidectomy

I Adenovirus infections
Definition
Adenoviruses are DNA viruses (small infectious
agents) that cause upper respiratory tract infections,
conjunctivitis, and other infections in humans.

Description
Adenoviruses were discovered in 1953. About 47
different types have been identified since then, and
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Conjunctivitis—Inflammation of the conjunctiva,
the mucous membrane lining the inner surfaces of
the eyelid and the front of the eyeball.
Virus—A small infectious agent consisting of a core
of genetic material (DNA or RNA) surrounded by a
shell of protein.

about half of them are believed to cause human diseases. Infants and children are most commonly
affected by adenoviruses. Adenovirus infections can
occur throughout the year, but seem to be most common from fall to spring.
Adenoviruses are responsible for 3-5% of acute
respiratory infections in children and 2% of respiratory illnesses in civilian adults. They are more apt to
cause infection among military recruits and other
young people who live in institutional environments.
Outbreaks among children are frequently reported at
boarding schools and summer camps. Another example includes an increased outbreak of gastroenteritis
among cruise passengers in 2002.

by types 3 and 7. Symptoms, which appear suddenly
and usually disappear in less than a week, include:


inflammation of the lining of the eyelid (conjunctivitis)



fever



sore throat (pharyngitis)



runny nose



inflammation of lymph glands in the neck (cervical
adenitis)

Adenoviruses also cause acute diarrhea in young
children, characterized by fever and watery stools.
This condition is caused by adenovirus types 40 and
41 and can last as long as two weeks.
As much as 51% of all hemorrhagic cystitis
(inflammation of the bladder and of the tubes that
carry urine to the bladder from the kidneys) in
American and Japanese children can be attributed to
adenovirus infection. A child who has hemorrhagic
cystitis has bloody urine for about three days, and
invisible traces of blood can be found in the urine a
few days longer. The child will feel the urge to urinate
frequently–but find it difficult to do so–for about the
same length of time.
Adult infections

Acquired immunity
Most children have been infected by at least one
adenovirus by the time they reach school age. Most
adults have acquired immunity to multiple adenovirus
types due to infections they had as children.
In one mode of adenovirus infection (called lytic
infection because it destroys large numbers of cells),
adenoviruses kill healthy cells and replicate up to
one million new viruses per cell killed (of which 1-5%
are infectious). People with this kind of infection feel
sick. In chronic or latent infection, a much smaller number of viruses are released and healthy cells can multiply
more rapidly than they are destroyed. People who have
this kind of infection don’t seem to be sick. This is
probably why many adults have immunity to adenoviruses without realizing they have been infected.
Childhood infections
In children, adenoviruses most often cause acute
upper respiratory infections with fever and runny nose.
Adenovirus types 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 are responsible for most
of these infections. Occasionally more serious lower
respiratory diseases, such as pneumonia, may occur.
Adenoviruses also cause acute pharyngoconjunctival fever in children. This disease is most often caused
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

In adults, the most frequently reported adenovirus infection is acute respiratory disease (ARD,
caused by types 4 and 7) in military recruits.
Influenza-like symptoms including fever, sore throat,
runny nose, and cough are almost always present;
weakness, chills, headache, and swollen lymph glands
in the neck also may occur. The symptoms typically
last three to five days.
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC, caused by
adenovirus types 8, 19, and 37) was first seen in shipyard workers whose eyes had been slightly injured by
chips of rust or paint. This inflammation of tissues
lining the eyelid and covering the front of the eyeball
also can be caused by using contaminated contact lens
solutions or by drying the hands or face with a towel
used by someone who has this infection.
The inflamed, sticky eyelids characteristic of
conjunctivitis develop 4-24 days after exposure and
last between one and four weeks. Only 5-8% of
patients with epidemic keratoconjunctivitis experience
respiratory symptoms. One or both eyes may be
affected. As symptoms of conjunctivitis subside, eye
pain and watering and blurred vision develop. These
symptoms of keratitis may last for several months, and
about 10% of these infections spread to at least one
other member of the patient’s household.
59

Adenovirus infections

KEY TERMS

Adenovirus infections

Other illnesses associated with adenovirus include:


encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) and other
infections of the central nervous system (CNS)



gastroenteritis (inflammation of the stomach and
intestines)



acute mesenteric lymphadenitis (inflammation of
lymph glands in the abdomen)



chronic interstitial fibrosis (abnormal growth of
connective tissue between cells)



intussusception (a type of intestinal obstruction)



pneumonia that doesn’t respond to antibiotic therapy



whooping cough syndrome when Bordetella pertussis
(the bacterium that causes classic whooping cough) is
not found

Causes and symptoms
Specific adenovirus infections can be traced to
particular sources and produce distinctive symptoms.
In general, however, adenovirus infection is caused by:


inhaling airborne viruses



getting the virus in the eyes by swimming in contaminated water, using contaminated eye solutions or
instruments, wiping the eyes with contaminated
towels, or rubbing the eyes with contaminated fingers.



not washing the hands after using the bathroom, and
then touching the mouth or eyes

Symptoms common to most types of adenovirus
infections include:


cough



fever



runny nose



sore throat



watery eyes

Treatment
Treatment of adenovirus infections is usually
supportive and aimed at relieving symptoms of the
illness. Bed rest may be recommended along with
medications to reduce fever and/or pain. (Aspirin
should not be given to children because of concerns
about Reye’s syndrome.) Eye infections may benefit
from topical corticosteroids to relieve symptoms and
shorten the course of the disease. Hospitalization is
usually required for severe pneumonia in infants and
for EKC (to prevent blindness). No effective antiviral
drugs have been developed.

Prognosis
Adenovirus infections are rarely fatal. Most
patients recover fully.

Prevention
Practicing good personal hygiene and avoiding
people with infectious illnesses can reduce the
risk of developing adenovirus infection. Proper handwashing can prevent the spread of the virus by oralfecal transmission. Sterilization of instruments and
solutions used in the eye can prevent the spread of
EKC, as can adequate chlorination of swimming
pools.
A vaccine for pertussis has been developed
and is in use in combination with diphtheria and tetanus vaccines for infants. It is shown to have nearly
90% efficacy. A vaccine containing live adenovirus
types 4 and 7 is used to control disease in military
recruits, but it is not recommended or available for
civilian use. A recent resurgence of the adenovirus
was found in a military population as soon as the
vaccination program was halted. Vaccines prepared
from purified subunits of adenovirus are under
investigation.
Resources

Diagnosis
Although symptoms may suggest the presence of
adenovirus, distinguishing these infections from other
viruses can be difficult. A definitive diagnosis is based
on culture or detection of the virus in eye secretions,
sputum, urine, or stool.
The extent of infection can be estimated from the
results of blood tests that measure increases in the
quantity of antibodies the immune system produces to
fight it. Antibody levels begin to rise about a week after
infection occurs and remain elevated for about a year.
60

PERIODICALS

Evans, Jeff. ‘‘Viral Gastroenteritis On Board.’’ Internal
Medicine News (January 15, 2003): 44.
‘‘Guard Against Pertussis.’’ Contemporary Pediatrics
(February 2003): 87.
Kolavic-Gray, Shellie A., et al. ‘‘Large Epidemic of
Adenovirus Type 4 Infection Among Military Trainees:
Epidemiological, Clinical, and Laboratory Studies.’’
Clinical Infectious Diseases (October 1, 2002): 808–811.

Maureen Haggerty
Teresa G. Odle
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Definition
Adhesions are fibrous bands of scar tissue that
form between internal organs and tissues, joining
them together abnormally.

Description
Adhesions are made up of blood vessels and fibroblasts—connective tissue cells. They form as a normal
part of the body’s healing process and help to limit
the spread of infection. However when adhesions
cause the wrong tissues to grow into each other,
many different complex inflammatory disorders can
arise. Worldwide millions of people suffer pain and
dysfunction due to adhesion disease.
Depending on their location, the most common
types of adhesions may called:


abdominal adhesions



intestinal adhesions



intraperitoneal adhesions



pelvic adhesions



intrauterine adhesions or Asherman’s syndrome.

Adhesions can form between various tissues in the
body including:


loops of the intestines



the intestines and other abdominal organs or the
abdominal wall



abdominal organs such as the liver or bladder and
the abdominal wall



tissues of the uterus.

Although adhesions can be congenital (present at
birth) or result from inflammation, injury, or infection, the vast majority of adhesions form following
surgery. Adhesions are a major complication of
many common surgical procedures and may occur in
55% to more than 90% of patients, depending on the
type of surgery.
All abdominal surgeries carry the risk of adhesion
formation. Abdominal adhesions are rare in people
who have not had abdominal surgery and very common in people who have had multiple abdominal surgeries. Adhesions are more common following
procedures involving the intestines, colon, appendix,
or uterus. They are less common following surgeries
involving the stomach, gall bladder, or pancreas.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

KEY TERMS
Asherman’s syndrome—The cessation of menstruation and/or infertility caused by intrauterine
adhesions.
Computed axial tomography; CT or CAT scan—A
computer reconstruction of scanned x rays used to
diagnose intestinal obstructions.
Endometriosis—A condition in which the endometrial tissue that lines the uterus begins to invade
other parts of the body.
Endoscope—A device with a light that is used to
look into a body cavity or organ.
Fibroblast—A connective-tissue cell.
Glaucoma—A group of eye diseases characterized
by increased pressure within the eye that can
damage the optic nerve and cause gradual loss of
vision.
Hysteroscopy—A procedure in which an endoscope is inserted through the cervix to view the
cervix and uterus.
Hysterosalpingography; HSG—X raying of the
uterus and fallopian tubes following the injection
of a contrast dye.
Irido corneal endothelial syndrome; ICE—A type
of glaucoma in which cells from the back of the
cornea spread over the surface of the iris and tissue
that drains the eye, forming adhesions that bind the
iris to the cornea.
Laparoscopic surgery; keyhole surgery—Surgery
that utilizes a laparoscope with a video camera and
surgical instruments inserted through small incisions.
Laparoscopy—A procedure that utilizes an endoscope to view contents of the abdominal cavity.
Pelvic inflammatory disease; PID—Inflammation
of the female reproductive organs and associated
structures.
Peritoneum—The membrane lining the walls of the
abdominal and pelvic cavities and enclosing their
organs.
Small bowel obstruction; SBO—An obstruction of
the small intestine that prevents the free passage of
material; sometimes caused by postoperative
adhesions.

Although most abdominal adhesions do not cause
problems, they can be painful when stretched or pulled
because the scar tissue is not elastic.

61

Adhesions

I Adhesions

Adhesions

Postoperative intestinal adhesions are a major
cause of intestinal or small bowel obstruction (SBO).
In a small number of people the scar tissue pulls sections of the small or large intestines out of place and
partially or completely blocks the passage of food and
fluids. Thus SBOs can result from abdominal surgery
and also are one of the most common reasons for
abdominal surgery. Although intestinal obstruction
is fatal in about 5% of patients, the mortality rate
associated with SBO has decreased dramatically over
the past century.
Intrauterine adhesions are relatively common in
women and the majority of women undergoing gynecological surgery develop postoperative adhesions.
Sometimes these pelvic adhesions cause chronic pelvic
pain and/or infertility.
Adhesions can cause a rare form of glaucoma
called irido corneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome. In
this disorder cells from the back surface of the cornea
of the eye spread over the surface of the iris and the
tissue that drains the eye, forming adhesions that bind
the iris to the cornea and causing further blockage of
the drainage channels. This blockage increases the
pressure inside the eye, which may damage the optic
nerve. ICE syndrome occurs most often in lightskinned females.

Causes and symptoms
Post-surgical adhesions
Common causes of postoperative adhesions
include:


abdominal surgery



gynecological surgery



thoracic surgery



orthopedic surgery



plastic surgery.

Abdominal adhesions most often result from surgeries in which the organs are handled or temporarily
moved. Intrauterine adhesions form after surgeries
involving the uterus, particularly curettage—the
scraping of the uterine contents. Surgery to control
uterine bleeding after giving birth also can lead to
intrauterine adhesions. Such adhesions can cause
Asherman’s syndrome, closing the uterus and preventing menstruation.
Other causes of adhesions
Any inflammation or infection of the membranes
that line the abdominal and pelvic walls and enclose
62

the organs—the peritoneum—can cause adhesions.
An example peritonitis, a severe infection that can
result from appendicitis, may lead to adhesions. In
addition to surgery or injury, pelvic adhesions can be
caused by inflammation resulting from an infection
such as pelvic inflammatory disease (PID).
Symptoms
In the majority of people adhesions do not cause
symptoms or serious problems. However in some people adhesions can lead to a variety of disorders. The
symptoms depend on the type of adhesion and the
tissues that are involved. Adhesions may cause pain
and/or fever in some people.
ABDOMINAL OBSTRUCTION. If a loop of intestine
becomes trapped under an adhesion, the intestine may
become partially or completely blocked. The symptoms of intestinal obstruction or SBOs due to adhesions depend on the degree and location of the
obstruction. Partial or off-and-on intestinal obstruction due to adhesions may result in intermittent periods of painful abdominal cramping and other
symptoms, including diarrhea.

Symptoms of significant intestinal obstruction
due to adhesions include:


severe abdominal pain and cramping



nausea and vomiting



abdominal distension (swelling)



constipation and the inability to pass gas



symptoms of dehydration.
Symptoms of dehydration include:



dry mouth and tongue



severe thirst



infrequent urination



dry skin



fast heart rate



low blood pressure.

In about 10% of SBOs, part of the intestine twists
tightly and repeatedly around a band of adhesions,
cutting off the blood supply to the intestine and resulting in strangulation and death of the twisted bowel.
The mortality rate for strangulation of the bowel may
be as high as 37%.
Symptoms of bowel strangulation due to adhesions include:


severe abdominal pain, either cramping or constant
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

abdominal distension due to the inability to pass
stool and gas



an extremely tender abdomen



signs of systemic (body-wide) illness, including fever,
fast heart rate, and low blood pressure.

When a portion of the obstructed bowel begins to
die from lack of blood flow, fluids and bacteria that
help digest food can leak out of the intestinal wall and
into the abdominal cavity causing peritonitis.
PELVIC ADHESIONS. Pelvic adhesions can interfere
with the functioning of the ovaries and fallopian tubes
and are among the common causes of female infertility. Adhesions on the ovaries or fallopian tubes can
prevent pregnancy by trapping the released egg.
Adhesions resulting from endometriosis can cause pelvic pain, particularly during menstruation, as well as
fertility problems.

Diagnosis
Adhesions are diagnosed based on the symptoms,
surgical history, and a physical examination. The physician examines the abdomen and rectum and performs
a pelvic examination on women. Blood tests and chest
and abdominal x rays are taken. Sometimes exploratory surgery is used to locate the adhesions and
sources of pain.
Abdominal computed axial tomography—a CT
or CAT scan—is the most common diagnostic tool
for SBO and intestinal strangulation due to adhesions.
In this procedure a computer reconstructs a portion
of the abdomen from x-ray scans. Barium contrast
x-ray studies also may be used to locate an obstruction. The ingestion of a barium solution provides better visualization of the abdominal organs. However
sometimes intestinal obstruction or strangulation
cannot be confirmed without abdominal surgery.
Exploratory laparoscopy may be used to detect
either abdominal or pelvic adhesions. This procedure
usually is performed in a hospital under local or general anesthesia. A small incision is made near the naval
and carbon dioxide gas is injected to raise the abdominal wall. A tube called a trocar is inserted into the
abdomen. The laparascope, equipped with a light and
a small video camera, is passed through the trocar
for visualization of the peritoneal cavity and the
abdominal or pelvic organs.
Pelvic adhesions also may be detected by hysteroscopy. In this procedure a uterine endoscope is
inserted through the cervix to visualize the cervix and
uterine cavity. With hysterosalpingography (HSG) a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

radiopaque or contrast dye is injected through a catheter in the cervix and x rays are taken of the uterus and
fallopian tubes.

Treatment
Although the symptoms of adhesion disease
sometimes disappear on their own, adhesions are permanent without a surgical procedure called adhesion
lysis to disrupt or remove the tissue.
Abdominal adhesions
Sometimes an adhesion-trapped intestine frees
itself spontaneously. Surgery may be used to reposition the intestine to relieve symptoms. Various other
techniques include using suction to decompress the
intestine; however untreated intestinal adhesions may
lead to bowel obstruction.
Although dilation with an endoscope may be used
to widen the region around an intestinal obstruction to
relieve symptoms, SBOs caused almost always require
immediate surgery. In cases of a partial obstruction or
a complete obstruction without severe symptoms, surgery may be delayed for 12–24 hours so that a dehydrated patient can be treated with intravenous fluids.
A small suction tube may be placed through the nose
into the stomach to remove the stomach contents to
relieve pain and nausea and prevent further bloating.
If an adhesion-related SBO disrupts the blood
supply to part of the intestine, gangrene—tissue
death—can occur. Strangulation of the bowel usually
requires emergency abdominal surgery to remove the
adhesions and restore blood flow to the intestine.
Intestinal obstruction repair is performed under general anesthesia. An incision is made in the abdomen,
the obstruction is located, and the adhesions are cut
away, releasing the intestine. The bowel is examined
for injury or tissue death. If possible, injured and dead
sections are removed and the healthy ends of the intestine are stitched together (resectioned). If resectioning
is not possible, the ends of the intestine are brought
through an opening in the abdomen called an ostomy.
In some cases laparoscopic surgery can be used to
removed damaged portions of the intestines. Five or
six small incisions—0.2–0.4 in. (5–10 mm) in length—
are made in the abdomen. The laparoscope, equipped
with its light and camera, and surgical instruments are
inserted through the incisions. The laparoscope guides
the surgeon by projecting images of the abdominal
organs on a video monitor. However the existence of
multiple adhesions may preclude the use of laparoscopic surgery.
63

Adhesions



Adhesions

Other types of adhesions

can be used to physically separate the tissues after
surgery to prevent the formation of postoperative
adhesions.However these gels and other barrier agents
may:

Adhesions caused by endometriosis may be
removed by either traditional open abdominal or pelvic surgery or by laparoscopic surgery. In the latter
technique the laparoscope includes a laser for destroying the tissue with heat. Although untreated gynecological adhesions can lead to infertility, both types of
surgeries also can result in adhesion formation.



suppress the immune system



cause infection



impair healing

ICE-type glaucoma caused by adhesions is difficult to treat; however untreated ICE syndrome can
lead to blindness. Treatment usually includes medication and/or filtering surgery. Filtering microsurgery
involves cutting a tiny hole in the white of the eye
(the sclera) to allow fluid to drain, thereby lowering
the pressure in the eye and preventing or reducing
damage to the optic nerve.

Systemic anti-inflammatory medications may be
used to help prevent adhesion formation. Recent studies suggest that the common oral arthritis drug,
Celebrex, an anti-inflammatory COX-2 inhibitor,
taken before and immediately after surgery, may
help prevent abdominal adhesions. Celebrex is
known to inhibit both the formation of blood vessels
and fibroblast activity, which are necessary for the
formation of scar tissue.

Alternative treatment
In cases where the intestines are partially blocked
by adhesions, a diet low in fiber—called a low-residue
diet—may enable food to move more easily through
the obstruction.

Prognosis
Intestinal obstruction surgery usually has a favorable outcome if the surgery is performed before tissue
damage or death occurs. Surgery to remove adhesions
and to free or reconnect the intestine often is sufficient
for reducing symptoms and returning normal function
to the intestine or other organ. However the risk of
new adhesion formation increases with each additional surgery. Thus abdominal adhesions can become
a recurring problem. Adhesions reform in 11–21% of
patients who have surgery to remove an adhesionrelated intestinal obstruction. The risk of recurrence
is particularly high among survivors of bowel
strangulation.

Prevention
Abdominal and gynecological laparoscopic surgeries—also known as ‘‘keyhole’’ surgeries—reduce
the size of the incision and the amount of contact
with the organs, thereby lowering the risk of adhesion
formation. Sometimes the intestines are fixed in place
during surgery so as to promote benign adhesions that
will not cause obstructions.
Within five days after surgery the disturbed tissue
surfaces have formed a new lining of mesothelial cells
that prevent adhesions from forming. Therefore biodegradable barrier membranes, films, gels, or sprays
64

Recent research has focused on the incorporation
of anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferation drugs into
polymeric films used for preventing and treating postsurgical adhesions. New types of gels to prevent postoperative adhesions also are under development.
Resources
BOOKS

Baerga-Varela, Y. ‘‘Small Bowel Obstruction.’’ Mayo Clinic
Gastrointestinal Surgery, edited by K. A. Kelly, et al.
St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Science, 2004.
PERIODICALS

‘‘Surgical Complications; Celebrex Prevents Adhesions
After Surgery.’’ Science Letter (February 15, 2005):
1443.
ORGANIZATIONS

National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse.
2 Information Way, Bethesda, MD 20892-3570. 800-8915389. 301-654-3810. <http://digestive.niddk.nih.gov/>.
OTHER

Abdominal Adhesions. Aetna InteliHealth. February 17,
2004 [cited March 2, 2005]. <http://www.intelihealth.
com/IH/ihtIH/WSIHW000/9339/9394.html>.
Endometriosis. MayoClinic.com. September 11, 2003 [cited
March 2, 2005]. <http://www.mayoclinic.com>.
Infertility. MayoClinic.com. September 21, 2004 [cited
March 2, 2005]. <http://www.mayoclinic.com/
invoke.cfm?id=DS00289>.
‘‘Intestinal Adhesions.’’ Digestive Diseases. National
Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse.
February 2004 [cited February 21, 2005]. <http://
digestive.niddk.nih.gov/ddiseases/pubs/intestinaladhe
sions/index.htm>.
What is Glaucoma? Glaucoma Research Foundation. [Cited
March 4, 2005]. <http://www.glaucoma.org/learn/>.

Margaret Alic, Ph.D.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

KEY TERMS

Definition

Multiple sclerosis—A progressive disorder of the
central nervous system in which scattered patches
of the protective sheath covering the nerves is
destroyed. The disease, which causes progressive
paralysis, is marked by periods of exacerbation and
remission. There is no cure.

An adjustment disorder is a debilitating reaction,
usually lasting less than six months, to a stressful event
or situation. It is not the same thing as post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), which usually occurs in reaction to a life-threatening event and can be longer
lasting.

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)—A specific
form of anxiety that begins after a life-threatening
event, such as rape, a natural disaster, or combatrelated trauma.

Description
An adjustment disorder usually begins within
three months of a stressful event, and ends within six
months after the stressor stops. There are many different subtypes of adjustment disorders, including
adjustment disorder with:



crying



anxiety



depression



worry



anxiety



headaches or stomachaches



mixed anxiety and depression



withdrawal



conduct disturbances



inhibition



mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct



truancy



unspecified



vandalism



reckless driving



fighting



other destructive acts

Adjustment disorders are very common and can
affect anyone, regardless of gender, age, race, or lifestyle. By definition, an adjustment disorder is shortlived, unless a person is faced with a chronic recurring
crisis (such as a child who is repeatedly abused). In
such cases, the adjustment disorder may last more
than six months.

Causes and symptoms
An adjustment disorder occurs when a person
can’t cope with a stressful event and develops emotional or behavioral symptoms. The stressful event can
be anything: it might be just one isolated incident, or a
string of problems that wears the person down. The
stress might be anything from a car accident or illness,
to a divorce, or even a certain time of year (such as
Christmas or summer).
People with adjustment disorder may have a wide
variety of symptoms. How those symptoms combine
depend on the particular subtype of adjustment disorder and on the individual’s personality and psychological defenses. Symptoms normally include some
(but not all) of the following:


hopelessness



sadness

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Diagnosis
It is extremely important that a thorough evaluation rule out other more serious mental disorders,
since the treatment for adjustment disorder may be
very different than for other mental problems.
In order to be diagnosed as a true adjustment
disorder, the level of distress must be more severe
than what would normally be expected in response to
the stressor, or the symptoms must significantly interfere with a person’s social, job, or school functioning.
Normal expression of grief, in bereavement for
instance, is not considered an adjustment disorder.

Treatment
Psychotherapy (counseling) is the treatment of
choice for adjustment disorders, since the symptoms
are an understandable reaction to a specific stress. The
type of therapy depends on the mental health expert,
but it usually is short-term treatment that focuses on
resolving the immediate problem.
65

Adjustment disorders

I Adjustment disorders

Adrenal gland cancer

Therapy usually will help clients:


develop coping skills



understand how the stressor has affected their lives



develop alternate social or recreational activities

Family or couples therapy may be helpful in some
cases. Medications are not usually used to treat adjustment disorders, although sometimes a few days or
weeks of an anti-anxiety drug can control anxiety or
sleeping problems.
Self-help groups aimed at a specific problem (such
as recovering from divorce or job loss) can be extremely helpful to people suffering from an adjustment
disorder. Social support, which is usually an important part of self-help groups, can lead to a quicker
recovery.

Prognosis
Most people recover completely from adjustment
disorders, especially if they had no previous history of
mental problems, and have a stable home life with
strong social support. People with progressive or cyclic
disorders (such as multiple sclerosis) may experience an
adjustment disorder with each exacerbation period.
Resources

When tumors develop in the adrenal gland, they
secrete excess amounts of these hormones. A cancer
that arises in the adrenal cortex is called an adrenocortical carcinoma and can produce high blood pressure, weight gain, excess body hair, weakening of the
bones and diabetes. A cancer in the adrenal medulla is
called a pheochromocytoma and can cause high blood
pressure, headache, palpitations, and excessive perspiration. Although these cancers can happen at any
age, most occur in young adults.

Causes and symptoms
It is not known what causes adrenal gland cancer,
but some cases are associated with hereditary diseases.
Symptoms of adrenal cancer are related to the specific
hormones produced by that tumor. An adrenocortical
carcinoma typically secretes high amounts of cortisol,
producing Cushing’s Syndrome. This syndrome produces progressive weight gain, rounding of the face,
and increased blood pressure. Women can experience
menstrual cycle alterations and men can experience
feminization. The symptoms for pheochromocytoma
include hypertension, acidosis, unexplained fever and
weight loss. Because of the hormones produced by this
type of tumor, anxiety is often a feature also.

Diagnosis

BOOKS

Luther, Suniya G., Jacob A. Burack, and Dante Cicchetti.
Developmental Psychopathology: Perspectives on
Adjustment, Risk, and Disorder. London: Cambridge
University Press, 1997.

Carol A. Turkington

Diagnosis for adrenal cancer usually begins with
blood tests to evaluate the hormone levels. These hormones include epinephrine, cortisol, and testosterone.
It also includes magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography scans to determine the extent of the
disease. Urine and blood tests can be done to detect
the high levels of hormone secreted by the tumor.

Treatment

I Adrenal gland cancer
Definition
Adrenal gland cancers are rare cancers occuring in
the endocrine tissue of the adrenals. They are characterized by overproduction of adrenal gland hormones.

Description
Cancers of the adrenal gland are very rare. The
adrenal gland is a hormone producing endocrine gland
with two main parts, the cortex and the medulla. The
main hormone of the adrenal cortex is cortisol and the
main hormone of the adrenal medulla is epinephrine.
66

Treatment is aimed at removing the tumor by
surgery. In some cases, this can be done by laparoscopy. Surgery is sometimes followed by chemotherapy
and/or radiation therapy. Because the surgery removes
the source of many important hormones, hormones
must be supplemented following surgery. If adrenocortical cancer recurs or has spread to other parts of
the body (metastasized), additional surgery may be
done followed by chemotherapy using the drug
mitotane.

Alternative treatment
As with any form of cancer, all conventional treatment options should be considered and applied as
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Cortisol—A hormone produced by the adrenal cortex. It is partially responsible for regulating blood
sugar levels.
Diabetes—A disease characterized by low blood
sugar.
Epinephrine—A hormone produced by the adrenal
medulla. It is important in the response to stress and
partially regulates heart rate and metabolism. It is
also called adrenaline.
Laparoscopy—The insertion of a tube through
the abdominal wall. It can be used to visualize
the inside of the abdomen and for surgical
procedures.

appropriate. Nutritional support, as well as supporting the functioning of the entire person diagnosed with
adrenal gland cancer through homeopathic medicine,
acupuncture, vitamin and mineral supplementation,
and herbal medicine, can benefit recovery and enhance
quality of life.

I Adrenal gland scan
Definition
The adrenal gland scan is a nuclear medicine evaluation of the medulla (inner tissue) of the adrenal
gland.

Purpose
The adrenal glands are a pair of small organs
located just above the kidney, which contain two
types of tissue. The adrenal cortex produces hormones
that affect water balance and metabolism in the body.
The adrenal medulla produces adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinepherine and norepinepherine).
An adrenal gland scan is done when too much
adrenaline and noradrenaline is produced in the
body and a tumor in the adrenal gland is suspected.
One such situation in which a tumor might be suspected is when high blood pressure (hypertension)
does not respond to medication. Tumors that secrete
adrenaline and noradrenaline can also be found outside the adrenal gland. An adrenal gland scan usually
covers the abdomen, chest, and head.

Precautions

Prognosis
The prognosis for adrenal gland cancer is variable. For localized pheochromocytomas the 5-year
survival rate is 95%. This rate decreases with aggressive tumors that have metastasized. The prognosis for
adrenal cortical cancer is not as good with a 5-year
survival rate of 10-35%.

Prevention
Since so little is known about the cause of adrenal
gland cancer, it is not known if it can be prevented.

Adrenal gland scans are not recommended for
pregnant women because of the potential harm to
the developing fetus. A pregnant woman should discuss with her doctor the risks of the procedure against
the benefits of the information it can provide in evaluating her individual medical situation.
People who have recently undergone tests that use
barium must wait until the barium has been eliminated
from their system in order to obtain accurate results
from the adrenal gland scan.

Description

Resources
BOOKS

Norton, J. A. ‘‘Adrenal Tumors.’’ In Cancer, Principles and
Practice of Oncology, edited by V. T. DeVita,
S. Hellman, and S. A. Rosenberg. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1997.
OTHER

Endocrine Web. <http://www.endocrineweb.com>.

Cindy L. A. Jones, PhD

Adrenal gland removal see Adrenalectomy
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The adrenal gland scan takes several days. On the
first day, a radiopharmaceutical is injected intravenously into the patient. On the second, third, and
fourth day the patient is positioned under the camera
for imaging. The scanning time each day takes
approximately 30 minutes. It is essential that the
patient remain still during imaging.
Occasionally, the scanning process may involve
fewer than three days, or it may continue several
days longer. The area scanned extends from the pelvis
and lower abdomen to the lower chest. Sometimes the
upper legs, thighs, and head are also included.
67

Adrenal gland scan

KEY TERMS

Adrenal virilism

Adrenal hypofunction see Addison’s disease

KEY TERMS
Adrenal cortex—The outer tissue of the adrenal
gland. It produces a group of chemically related
hormones called corticosteroids that control
mineral and water balance in the body and include
aldosterone and cortisol.
Adrenal medulla—The inner tissue of the adrenal
gland. It produces the hormones adrenaline and
noradrenaline.
Lugol’s solution—A strong iodine solution.

Preparation
For two days before and ten days after the injection of the radiopharmaceutical, patients are given
either Lugol’s solution or potassium iodine. This prevents the thyroid from taking up radioactive iodine
and interfering with the scan.

Aftercare
The patient should not feel any adverse effects of
the test and can resume normal activity immediately.
Follow-up tests that might be ordered include a
nuclear scan of the bones or kidney, a computed
tomography scan (CT) of the adrenals, or an ultrasound of the pelvic area.

Adrenal insufficiency see Addison’s disease

I Adrenal virilism
Definition
Adrenal virilism is the development or premature
development of male secondary sexual characteristics
caused by male sex hormones (androgens) excessively
produced by the adrenal gland. This disorder can
occur before birth and can lead to sexual abnormalities in newborns. It can also occur in girls and women
later in life.

Description
In the normal human body, there are two adrenal
glands. They are small structures that lie on top of the
kidneys. The adrenal glands produce many hormones
that regulate body functions. These hormones include
androgens, or male hormones. Androgens are produced in normal girls and women. Sometimes, one or
both of the adrenal glands becomes enlarged or overactive, producing more than the usual amount of
androgens. The excess androgens create masculine
characteristics.

Risks
The main risk associated with this test is to the
fetus of a pregnant woman.

Normal results
Normal results will show no unusual areas of
hormone secretion and no tumors.

Abnormal results
Abnormal results will show evidence of a tumor
where there is excessive secretion of adrenaline or
noradrenaline. Over 90% of these tumors are in the
abdomen.
Resources
BOOKS

Fishback, Francis, editor. A Manual of Laboratory and
Diagnostic Tests. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1996.

Tish Davidson, A.M.
68

Causes and symptoms
In infants and children, adrenal virilism is usually
the result of adrenal gland enlargement that is present
at birth. This is called congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
The cause is usually a genetic problem that leads to
severe enzyme deficiencies. In rare cases, adrenal
virilism is caused by an adrenal gland tumor. The
tumor can be benign (adrenal adenoma) or cancerous
(adrenal carcinoma). Sometimes virilism is caused by a
type of tumor on a woman’s ovary (arrhenoblastoma).
Newborn girls with adrenal virilism have external
sex organs that seem to be a mixture of male and
female organs (called female pseudohermaphrodism).
Newborn boys with the disorder have enlarged external sex organs, and these organs develop at an abnormally rapid pace.
Children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia begin
growing abnormally fast, but they stop growing earlier
than normal. Later in childhood, they are typically
shorter than normal but have well-developed trunks.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Diagnosis
Endocrinologists, doctors who specialize in the
diagnosis and treatment of glandular disorders, have
the most expertise to deal with adrenal virilization.
Some doctors who treat disorders of the internal
organs (internists) and doctors who specialize in treating the reproductive system of women (gynecologists)
may also be able to help patients with this disorder.
Diagnosis involves performing many laboratory
tests on blood samples from the patient. These tests
measure the concentration of different hormones.
Different abnormalities of the adrenal gland produce
a different pattern of hormonal abnormalities. These
tests can also help determine if the problem is adrenal
or ovarian. If a tumor is suspected, special x rays may
be done to visualize the tumor in the body. Final
diagnosis may depend on obtaining a tissue sample
from the tumor (biopsy), and examining it under a
microscope in order to verify its characteristics.

KEY TERMS
Glucocorticoid—A hormone produced by the
adrenal gland; this hormone leads to an increase
in blood sugar and creation of sugar molecules by
the liver.
Hydrocortisone—A hormone in the group of glucocorticoid hormones.
Prednisone—A drug that functions as a glucocorticoid hormone.

but there is no cure. If a cancerous tumor has caused
the disorder, patients have a better prognosis if they
have an early stage of cancer that is diagnosed quickly
and has not spread.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Willensy, D. ‘‘The Endocrine System.’’ AmericanHealth
April 1996: 92-3.

Richard H. Lampert

Treatment
Adrenal virilism caused by adrenal hyperplasia is
treated with daily doses of a glucocorticoid. Usually
prednisone is the drug of choice, but in infants hydrocortisone is usually given. Laboratory tests are usually
needed from time to time to adjust the dosage. Girls
with pseudohermaphrodism may require surgery to
make their external sex organs appear more normal.
If a tumor is causing the disorder, the treatment will
depend on the type and location of the tumor.
Information about the tumor cell type and the spread
of the tumor is used to decide the best kind of treatment
for a particular patient. If the tumor is cancerous, the
patient will require special treatment depending on how
far the cancer has advanced. Treatment can be a combination of surgery, medications used to kill cancer cells
(chemotherapy), and x rays or other high energy rays
used to kill cancer cells (radiation therapy). Sometimes
the doctor must remove the adrenal gland and the
surrounding tissues. If the tumor is benign, then surgically removing the tumor may be the best option.

Prognosis
Ongoing glucocorticoid treatment usually controls adrenal virilism in cases of adrenal hyperplasia,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

I Adrenalectomy
Definition
Adrenalectomy is the surgical removal of one or
both of the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are
paired endocrine glands, one located above each kidney, that produce hormones such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, androgens, estrogens, aldosterone, and
cortisol. Adrenalectomy is usually performed by conventional (open) surgery, but in selected patients surgeons may use laparoscopy. With laparoscopy,
adrenalectomy can be accomplished through four
very small incisions.

Purpose
Adrenalectomy is usually advised for patients
with tumors of the adrenal glands. Adrenal gland
tumors may be malignant or benign, but all typically
excrete excessive amounts of one or more hormones. A
successful procedure will aid in correcting hormone
imbalances, and may also remove cancerous tumors
that can invade other parts of the body. Occasionally,
adrenalectomy may be recommended when hormones
69

Adrenalectomy

Women with adrenal virilization may develop
facial hair. Typically, their menstrual cycles are infrequent or absent. They may also develop a deeper
voice, a more prominent Adam’s apple, and other
masculine signs.

Adrenalectomy

produced by the adrenal glands aggravate another
condition such as breast cancer.

Precautions
The adrenal glands are fed by numerous blood
vessels, so surgeons need to be alert to extensive bleeding during surgery. In addition, the adrenal glands lie
close to one of the body’s major blood vessels (the
vena cava), and to the spleen and the pancreas. The
surgeon needs to remove the gland(s) without damaging any of these important and delicate organs.

Description
Open adrenalectomy
The surgeon may operate from any of four directions, depending on the exact problem and the
patient’s body type.
In the anterior approach, the surgeon cuts into the
abdominal wall. Usually the incision will be horizontal, just under the rib cage. If the surgeon intends to
operate on only one of the adrenal glands, the incision
will run under just the right or the left side of the rib
cage. Sometimes a vertical incision in the middle of the
abdomen provides a better approach, especially if
both adrenal glands are involved.
In the posterior approach, the surgeon cuts into
the back, just beneath the rib cage. If both glands are
to be removed, an incision is made on each side of the
body. This approach is the most direct route to the
adrenal glands, but it does not provide quite as clear a
view of the surrounding structures as the anterior
approach.
In the flank approach, the surgeon cuts into the
patient’s side. This is particularly useful in massively
obese patients. If both glands need to be removed, the
surgeon must remove one gland, repair the surgical
wound, turn the patient onto the other side, and repeat
the entire process.
The last approach involves an incision into the
chest cavity, either with or without part of the incision
into the abdominal cavity. It is used when the surgeon
anticipates a very large tumor, or if the surgeon needs
to examine or remove nearby structures as well.
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
This technique does not require the surgeon to
open the body cavity. Instead, four small incisions
(about 1/2 in diameter each) are made into a patient’s
flank, just under the rib cage. A laparoscope, which
enables the surgeon to visualize the inside of the
70

KEY TERMS
Laparoscope—An instrument that enables the surgeon to see inside the abdominal cavity by means
of a thin tube that carries an image to a television
monitor.
Pancreas—An organ that secretes a number of
digestive hormones and also secretes insulin to
regulate blood sugar.
Pheochromocytoma—A tumor of specialized cells
of the adrenal gland.
Spleen—An organ that traps and breaks down red
blood cells at the end of their useful life and manufactures some key substances used by the immune
system.
Vena cava—The large vein that drains directly into
the heart after gathering incoming blood from the
entire body.

abdominal cavity on a television monitor, is placed
through one of the incisions. The other incisions are
for tubes that carry miniaturized versions of surgical
tools. These tools are designed to be operated by
manipulations that the surgeon makes outside the
body.

Preparation
Most aspects of preparation are the same as in
other major operations. In addition, hormone imbalances are often a major challenge. Whenever possible,
physicians will try to correct hormone imbalances
through medication in the days or weeks before surgery. Adrenal tumors may cause other problems such
as hypertension or inadequate potassium in the blood,
and these problems also should be resolved if possible
before surgery is performed. Therefore, a patient may
take specific medicines for days or weeks before
surgery.
Most adrenal tumors can be imaged very well with
a CT scan or MRI, and benign tumors tend to look
different on these tests than do cancerous tumors.
Surgeons may order a CT scan, MRI, or scintigraphy
(viewing of the location of a tiny amount of radioactive agent) to help locate exactly where the tumor is.
The day before surgery, patients will probably
have an enema to clear the bowels. In patients with
lung problems or clotting problems, physicians may
advise special preparations.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Patients stay in the hospital for various lengths of
time after adrenalectomy. The longest hospital stays
are required for open surgery using an anterior
approach; hospital stays of about three days are indicated for open surgery using the posterior approach or
for laparoscopic adrenalectomy.
The special concern after adrenalectomy is the
patient’s hormone balance. There may be several sets
of lab tests to define hormone problems and monitor
the results of drug treatment. In addition, blood pressure problems and infections are more common after
removal of certain types of adrenal tumors.
As with most open surgery, surgeons are also
concerned about blood clots forming in the legs and
traveling to the lungs (venous thromboembolism),
bowel problems, and postoperative pain. With laparoscopic adrenalectomy, these problems are somewhat
less difficult, but they are still present.

I Adrenocorticotropic
hormone
test
Definition
Adrenocorticotropic hormone test (also known as
an ACTH test or a corticotropin test) measures pituitary gland function.

Purpose
The pituitary gland produces the hormone
ACTH, which stimulates the outer layer of the adrenal
gland (the adrenal cortex). ACTH causes the release of
the hormones hydrocortisone (cortisol), aldosterone,
and androgen. The most important of these hormones
released is cortisol. The ACTH test is used to determine if too much cortisol is being produced (Cushing’s
syndrome) or if not enough cortisol is being produced
(Addison’s disease).

Precautions

Risks
The special risks of adrenalectomy involve major
hormone imbalances, caused by the underlying disease, the surgery, or both.These can include problems
with wound healing itself, blood pressure fluctuations,
and other metabolic problems.
Other risks are typical of many operations.These
include:


bleeding



damage to adjacent organs (spleen, pancreas)



loss of bowel function



blood clots in the lungs



lung problems



surgical infections



pain



extensive scarring

ACTH has diurnal variation, meaning that the
levels of this hormone vary according to the time of
day. The highest levels occur in the morning hours.
Testing for normal secretion, as well as for Cushing’s
disease, may require multiple samples. For sequential
follow-up, a blood sample analyzed for ACTH should
always be drawn at the same time each day.
ACTH can be directly measured by an analyzing
method (immunoassay) in many large laboratories.
However, smaller laboratories are usually not
equipped to perform this test and they may need to
send the blood sample to a larger laboratory. Because
of this delay, results may take several days to obtain.

Description

Resources
BOOKS

Fauci, Anthony S., et al., editors. Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.

Richard H. Lampert

ACTH production is partly controlled by an area
in the center of the brain (the hypothalamus) and partly
controlled by the level of cortisol in the blood. When
ACTH levels are too high, cortisol production increases
to suppress ACTH release from the pituitary gland. If
ACTH levels are too low, the hypothalamus produces
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) to stimulate
the pituitary gland to make more ACTH. ACTH levels
rise in response to stress, emotions, injury, infection,
burns, surgery, and decreased blood pressure.
Cushing’s syndrome

Adrenocortical insufficiency see Addison’s
disease
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Cushing’s syndrome is caused by an abnormally
high level of circulating hydrocortisone. The high level
71

Adrenocorticotropic hormone test

Aftercare

Adrenoleukodystrophy

KEY TERMS
Adrenal glands—A pair of endocrine glands that lie
on top of the kidneys.
Pituitary gland—The most important of the endocrine glands, glands that release hormones directly
into the bloodstream; sometimes called the master
gland.

may be the result of an adrenal gland tumor or enlargement of both adrenal glands due to a pituitary
tumor. The high level of hydrocortisone may be the
result of taking corticosteroid drugs for a long time.
Corticosteroid drugs are widely used for inflammation
in disorders like rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory
bowel disease, and asthma.
Addison’s disease
Addison’s disease is a rare disorder in which
symptoms are caused by a deficiency of hydrocortisone and aldosterone. The most common cause of
this disease is an autoimmune disorder. The immune
system normally fights foreign invaders in the body
like bacteria. In an autoimmune disorder, the
immune systems attacks the body. In this case, the
immune system produces antibodies that attack
the adrenal glands. Addison’s disease generally progresses slowly, with symptoms developing gradually
over months or years. However, acute episodes,
called Addisonian crises, are brought on by infection,
injury, or other stresses. Diagnosis is generally made
if the patient fails to respond to an injection of
ACTH, which normally stimulates the secretion of
hydrocortisone.

Preparation
A person’s ACTH level is determined from a
blood sample. The patient must fast from midnight
until the test the next morning. This means that the
patient cannot eat or drink anything after midnight
except water. The patient must also avoid radioisotope scanning tests or recently administered radioisotopes prior to the blood test.

Risks
The risks associated with this test are minimal.
They may include slight bleeding from the location
where the blood was drawn. The patient may feel faint
or lightheaded after the blood is drawn. Sometimes
72

the patient may have an accumulation of blood
under the puncture site (hematoma) after the test.

Normal results
Each laboratory will have its own set of normal
values for this test. The normal values can range from:
Morning (4-8 A.M.) 8-100 pg/mL or 10-80 ng/L (SI
units) Evening (8-10 P.M.) less than 50 pg/mL or less
than 50 ng/L (SI units)

Abnormal results
In Cushing’s syndrome, high levels of ACTH may
be caused by ACTH-producing tumors. These tumors
may be either in the pituitary or in another area (like
tumors from lung cancer or ovarian cancer). Low
ACTH levels may be caused by adrenal enlargement
due to high levels of cortisol and feedback to the
pituitary.
In Addison’s disease, high levels of ACTH may be
caused by adrenal gland diseases. These diseases
decrease adrenal hormones and the pituitary attempts
to increase functioning. Low levels of ACTH may
occur because of decreased pituitary function.
Resources
BOOKS

Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnosticand
Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998.

Janis O. Flores

Adrenogenital syndrome see Adrenal
virilism

I Adrenoleukodystrophy
Definition
Adrenoleukodystrophy is a rare genetic disease
characterized by a loss of myelin surrounding nerve
cells in the brain and progressive adrenal gland
dysfunction.

Description
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a member of a
group of diseases, leukodystrophies, that cause damage
to the myelin sheath of nerve cells. Approximately one
in 100,000 people is affected by ALD. There are three
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The adult-onset form of the disease, also called
adrenomyeloneuropathy, is milder, progresses slowly,
is usually associated with a normal life span, and
usually appears between ages 21-35. Symptoms may
include progressive stiffness, weakness, or paralysis of
the lower limbs and loss of coordination. Brain function deterioration may also been seen. Women who
are carriers of the disease occasionally experience the
same symptoms, as well as others, including ataxia,
hypertonia (excessive muscle tone), mild peripheral
neuropathy, and urinary problems. The neonatal
form affects both male and female infants and may
produce mental retardation, facial abnormalities, seizures, retinal degeneration, poor muscle tone,
enlarged liver, and adrenal dysfunction. Neonatal
ALD usually progresses rapidly.

Causes and symptoms
The genetic defect in ALD causes a decrease in the
ability to degrade very long chain fatty acids. These
build up in the adrenal glands, brain, plasma, and
fibroblasts. The build-up of very long chain fatty
acids interferes with the ability of the adrenal gland
to convert cholesterol into steroids and causes demyelination of nerves in the white matter of the brain.
Demyelinated nerve cells are unable to function
properly.

KEY TERMS
Amniocentesis—The collection of amniotic fluid
through a needle inserted through the abdomen.
Used to collect fetal cells for genetic analysis.
Ataxia—Loss of coordination of muscular movement.
Hypertonia—Having excessive muscular tone.
Myelin—A layer that encloses nerve cells and some
axons and is made largely of lipids and lipoproteins.
Neuropathy—A disease or abnormality of the peripheral nerves.

Treatment
Treatment for all forms of ALD consists of treating the symptoms and supporting the patient with
physical therapy, psychological counseling, and special education in some cases. There is no cure for this
disease, and there are no drugs that can reverse demyelination of nerve and brain cells. Dietary measures
consist of reducing the intake of foods high in fat,
which are a source of very long chain fatty acids. A
mixture called Lorenzo’s Oil has been shown to reduce
the level of long chain fatty acids if used long term;
however, the rate of myelin loss is unaffected.
Experimental bone marrow transplantation has not
been very effective.

Prognosis
Prognosis for childhood and neonatal ALD
patients is poor because of the progressive myelin
degeneration. Death usually occurs between one and
ten years after onset of symptoms.

Prevention
Since ALD is a genetic disease, prevention is largely limited to genetic counseling and fetal monitoring
through amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.
Resources

Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made based on observed symptoms, a
biochemical test, and a family history. The biochemical test detects elevated levels of very long chain fatty
acids in samples from amniocentesis, chorionic villi,
plasma, red blood cells, or fibroblasts. A family history may indicate the likelihood of ALD because the
disease is carried on the X-chromosome by the female
lineage of families.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

BOOKS

Berkow, Robert. Merck Manual of Medical Information.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research
Laboratories, 1997.

John T. Lohr, PhD

Adrenomyeloneuropathy see
Adrenoleukodystrophy
73

Adrenoleukodystrophy

basic forms of ALD: childhood, adult-onset, and
neonatal. The childhood form of the disease is the
classical form and is the most severe. Childhood
ALD is progressive and usually leads to total disability or death. It affects only boys because the genetic
defect is sex-linked (carried on the X chromosome).
Onset usually occurs between ages four and ten and
can include many different symptoms, not all of
which appear together. The most common symptoms
are behavioral problems and poor memory. Other
symptoms frequently seen are loss of vision, seizures,
poorly articulated speech, difficulty swallowing,
deafness, problems with gait and coordination, fatigue, increased skin pigmentation, and progressive
dementia.

Adult respiratory distress syndrome

I Adult
respiratory distress
syndrome

KEY TERMS
Alveoli—The tiny air sacs at the ends of the breathing tubes of the lung where oxygen normally is
taken up by the capillaries to enter the circulation.
Aspiration—The process in which solid food,
liquids, or secretions that normally are swallowed
are, instead, breathed into the lungs.

Definition
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), also
called acute respiratory distress syndrome, is a type
of lung (pulmonary) failure that may result from any
disease that causes large amounts of fluid to collect
in the lungs. ARDS is not itself a specific disease, but a
syndrome, a group of symptoms and signs that
make up one of the most important forms of lung or
respiratory failure. It can develop quite suddenly in
persons whose lungs have been perfectly normal.
Very often ARDS is a true medical emergency. The
basic fault is a breakdown of the barrier, or membrane, that normally keeps fluid from leaking out of
the small blood vessels of the lung into the breathing
sacs (the alveoli).

Capillaries—The smallest arteries which, in the
lung, are located next to the alveoli so that they
can pick up oxygen from inhaled air.
Face mask—The simplest way of delivering a high
level of oxygen to patients with ARDS or other lowoxygen conditions.
Steroids—A class of drugs resembling normal body
substances that often help control inflammation in
the body tissues.
Ventilator—A mechanical device that can take
over the work of breathing for a patient whose
lungs are injured or are starting to heal.

Description
Another name for ARDS is shock lung. Its formal
name is misleading, because children, as well as adults,
may be affected. In the lungs the smallest blood vessels, or capillaries, make contact with the alveoli, tiny
air sacs at the tips of the smallest breathing tubes (the
bronchi). This is the all-important site where oxygen
passes from air that is inhaled to the blood, which
carries it to all parts of the body. Any form of lung
injury that damages this point of contact, called the
alveolo-capillary junction, will allow blood and tissue
fluid to leak into the alveoli, eventually filling them so
that air cannot enter. The result is the type of breathing distress called ARDS. ARDS is one of the major
causes of excess fluid in the lungs, the other being heart
failure.
Along with fluid there is a marked increase in
inflamed cells in the lungs. There also is debris left
over from damaged lung cells, and fibrin, a semisolid material derived from blood in the tissues.
Typically these materials join together with large
molecules in the blood (proteins), to form hyaline
membranes. (These membranes are very prominent
in premature infants who develop respiratory distress
syndrome; it is often called hyaline membrane disease.) If ARDS is very severe or lasts a long time, the
lungs do not heal, but rather become scarred, a process
known as fibrosis. The lack of a normal amount of
oxygen causes the blood vessels of the lung to become
narrower, and in time they, too, may become scarred
and filled with clotted blood. The lungs as a whole
become very ‘‘stiff,’’ and it becomes much harder for
the patient to breathe.
74

Causes and symptoms
A very wide range of diseases or toxic substances,
including some drugs, can cause ARDS. They include:


Breathing in (aspiration) of the stomach contents
when regurgitated, or salt water or fresh water from
nearly drowning.



Inhaling smoke, as in a fire; toxic materials in the air,
such as ammonia or hydrocarbons; or too much
oxygen, which itself can injure the lungs.



Infection by a virus or bacterium, or sepsis, a widespread infection that gets into the blood.



Massive trauma, with severe injury to any part of the
body.



Shock with persistently low blood pressure may not
in itself cause ARDS, but it can be an important
factor.



A blood clotting disorder called disseminated intravascular coagulation, in which blood clots form in
vessels throughout the body, including the lungs.



A large amount of fat entering the circulation and
traveling to the lungs, where it lodges in small blood
vessels, injuring the cells lining the vessel walls.



An overdose of a narcotic drug, a sedative, or, rarely,
aspirin.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), when
blood proteins, called enzymes, pass to the lungs
and injure lung cells.



Severe burn injury.



Injury of the brain, or bleeding into the brain, from
any cause may be a factor in ARDS for reasons that
are not clear. Convulsions also may cause some
cases.

Usually ARDS develops within one to two days of
the original illness or injury. The person begins to take
rapid but shallow breaths. The doctor who listens to
the patient’s chest with a stethoscope may hear
‘‘crackling’’ or wheezing sounds. The low blood oxygen content may cause the skin to appear mottled or
even blue. As fluid continues to fill the breathing sacs,
the patient may have great trouble breathing, take
very rapid breaths, and gasp for air.

Diagnosis
A simple test using a device applied to the ear will
show whether the blood is carrying too little oxygen,
and this can be confirmed by analyzing blood taken
from an artery. The chest x ray may be normal in the
early stages, but, in a short time, fluid will be seen
where it does not belong. The two lungs are about
equally affected. A heart of normal size indicates that
the problem actually is ARDS and not heart failure.
Another way a physician can distinguish between
these two possibilities is to place a catheter into a
vein and advance it into the main artery of the lung.
In this way, the pressure within the pulmonary capillaries can be measured. Pressure within the pulmonary
capillaries is elevated in heart failure, but normal
in ARDS.

Treatment
The three main goals in treating patients with
ARDS are:


To treat whatever injury or disease has caused
ARDS. Examples are: to treat septic infection with
the proper antibiotics, and to reduce the level of
oxygen therapy if ARDS has resulted from a toxic
level of oxygen.



To control the process in the lungs that allows fluid
to leak out of the blood vessels. At present there
is no certain way to achieve this. Certain steroid
hormones have been tried because they can combat
inflammation, but the actual results have been
disappointing.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE



To make sure the patient gets enough oxygen until
the lung injury has had time to heal. If oxygen delivered by a face mask is not enough, the patient is
placed on a ventilator, which takes over breathing,
and, through a tube placed in the nose or mouth (or
an incision in the windpipe), forces oxygen into the
lungs. This treatment must be closely supervised, and
the pressure adjusted so that too much oxygen is not
delivered.

Patients with ARDS should be cared for in an
intensive care unit, where experienced staff and all
needed equipment are available. Enough fluid must
be provided, by vein if necessary, to prevent dehydration. Also, the patient’s nutritional state must be maintained, again by vein, if oral intake is not sufficient.

Prognosis
If the patient’s lung injury does not soon begin to
heal, the lack of sufficient oxygen can injure other
organs, such as the kidneys. There always is a risk
that bacterial pneumonia will develop at some point.
Without prompt treatment, as many as 90% of
patients with ARDS can be expected to die. With
modern treatment, however, about half of all patients
will survive. Those who do live usually recover completely, with little or no long-term breathing difficulty.
Lung scarring is a risk after a long period on a ventilator, but it may improve in the months after the
patient is taken off ventilation. Whether a particular
patient will recover depends to a great extent on
whether the primary disease that caused ARDS to
develop in the first place can be effectively treated.

Prevention
The only way to prevent ARDS is to avoid those
diseases and harmful conditions that damage the lung.
For instance, the danger of aspirating stomach contents into the lungs can be avoided by making sure a
patient does not eat shortly before receiving general
anesthesia. If a patient needs oxygen therapy, as low a
level as possible should be given. Any form of lung
infection, or infection anywhere in the body that gets
into the blood, must be treated promptly to avoid the
lung injury that causes ARDS.
Resources
BOOKS

Smolley, Lawrence A., and Debra F. Bryse. Breathe
RightNow: A Comprehensive Guide to Understanding
and Treating the Most Common Breathing Disorders.
New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1998.

75

Adult respiratory distress syndrome



Aging

ORGANIZATIONS

National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
National Respiratory Distress Syndrome Foundation. P.O.
Box 723, Montgomeryville, PA 18936.



Hearing, which declines especially in relation to the
highest pitched tones.



The proportion of fat to muscle, which may increase
by as much as 30%. Typically, the total padding of
body fat directly under the skin thins out and accumulates around the stomach. The ability to excrete
fats is impaired, and therefore the storage of fats
increases, including cholesterol and fat-soluble
nutrients.



The amount of water in the body decreases, which
therefore decreases the absorption of water-soluble
nutrients. Also, there is less saliva and other lubricating fluids.



The liver and the kidneys cannot function as efficiently, thus affecting the elimination of wastes.



A decrease in the ease of digestion, with a decrease in
stomach acid production.



A loss of muscle strength and coordination, with an
accompanying loss of mobility, agility, and
flexibility.



A decline in sexual hormones and sexual functioning.



A decrease in the sensations of taste and smell.



Changes in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems, leading to decreased oxygen and nutrients
throughout the body.



Decreased functioning of the nervous system so that
nerve impulses are not transmitted as efficiently,
reflexes are not as sharp, and memory and learning
are diminished.



A decrease in bone strength and density.



Hormone levels, which gradually decline. The thyroid and sexual hormones are particularly affected.



Declining visual abilities. Age-related changes may
lead to diseases such as macular degeneration.



A compromised ability to produce vitamin D from
sunlight.



A reduction in protein formation leading to shrinkage in muscle mass and decreased bone formation,
possibly leading to osteoporosis.

David A. Cramer, MD

AFP test see Alpha-fetoprotein test
African American health see Minority health
African sleeping sickness see Sleeping
sickness
African trypanosomiasis see Sleeping
sickness
Agammaglobulinemia see Common variable
immunodeficiency
Aggression see Conduct disorder

I Aging
Definition
Starting at what is commonly called middle age,
operations of the human body begin to be more vulnerable to daily wear and tear; there is a general
decline in physical, and possibly mental, functioning.
In the Western countries, the length of life is often into
the 70s. The upward limit of the life span, however,
can be as high as 120 years. During the latter half of
life, an individual is more prone to have problems with
the various functions of the body and to develop any
number of chronic or fatal diseases. The cardiovascular, digestive, excretory, nervous, reproductive and
urinary systems are particularly affected. The most
common diseases of aging include Alzheimer’s, arthritis, cancer, diabetes, depression, and heart disease.

Description
Human beings reach a peak of growth and development around the time of their mid 20s. Aging is the
normal transition time after that flurry of activity.
Although there are quite a few age-related changes
that tax the body, disability is not necessarily a part
of aging. Health and lifestyle factors together with
the genetic makeup of the individual, and determines
the response to these changes. Body functions that are
most often affected by age include:
76

Causes and symptoms
There are several theories as to why the aging
body loses functioning. It may be that several factors
work together or that one particular factor is at work
more than others in a given individual.


Programmed senescence, or aging clock, theory. The
aging of the cells of each individual is programmed
into the genes, and there is a preset number of
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE



Genetic theory. Human cells maintain their own seed
of destruction at the level of the chromosomes.



Connective tissue, or cross-linking theory. Changes
in the make-up of the connective tissue alter the
stability of body structures, causing a loss of elasticity and functioning, and leading to symptoms of
aging.





Free-radical theory. The most commonly held theory
of aging, it is based on the fact that ongoing chemical
reactions of the cells produce free radicals. In the
presence of oxygen, these free radicals cause the
cells of the body to break down. As time goes on,
more cells die or lose the ability to function, and the
body soon ceases to function as a whole.
Immunological theory. There are changes in the immune system as it begins to wear out, and the body is
more prone to infections and tissue damage, which
may finally cause death. Also, as the system breaks
down, the body is more apt to have autoimmune
reactions, in which the body’s own cells are mistaken
for foreign material and are destroyed or damaged
by the immune system.

Diagnosis
Many problems can arise due to age-related
changes in the body. Although there is no one test to
be given, a thorough physical exam and a basic blood
screening and blood chemistry panel can point to
areas in need of further attention. When older people
become ill, the first signs of disease are often nonspecific. Further exams should be conducted if any of the
following occur:

KEY TERMS
Antioxidants—Substances that reduce the damage
of the highly reactive free radicals that are the
byproducts of the cells.
Alzheimer’s disease—A condition causing a
decline in brain function that interferes with the
ability to reason and to perform daily activities.
Senescence—Aging.
Vata—One of the three main constitutional types
found under Ayurvedic principles. Keeping one’s
particular constitution in balance is considered
important in maintaining health.

take medications for various complaints. More
women than men use these medications. The most
common drugs used by the elderly are painkillers,
diuretics or water pills, sedatives, cardiac drugs, antibiotics, and mental health drugs.
Estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) is commonly prescribed to postmenopausal women for
symptoms of aging. It is often used in conjunction
with progesterone. ERT functions to help keep bones
strong, reduce risk of heart disease, restore vaginal
lubrication, and to improve skin elasticity. Evidence
suggests that it may also help maintain mental
functions.

Expected results
Aging is unavoidable, but major physical impairment is not. People can lead a healthy, disability-free
life well through their later years. A well established
support system of family, friends, and health care
providers, together with focus on good nutrition and
lifestyle habits and good stress management, can
prevent disease and lessen the impact of chronic
conditions.



diminished or lack of desire for food



increasing confusion



failure to thrive



urinary incontinence



dizziness

Alternative treatment



weight loss

Nutritional supplements



falling

Treatment
For the most part, doctors prescribe medications
to control the symptoms and diseases of aging. In the
United States, about two-thirds of people 65 and over
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Aging

possible rejuvenations in the life of a given cell. When
cells die at a rate faster than they are replaced, organs
do not function properly, and they are soon unable
to maintain the functions necessary for life.

Consumption of a high–quality multivitamin is
recommended. Common nutritional deficiencies connected with aging include B vitamins, vitamins A and
C, folic acid, calcium, magnesium, zinc, iron, chromium, and trace minerals. Since stomach acids may
be decreased, it is suggested that the use of a powdered
multivitamin formula in gelatin capsules be used, as
77

Aging

this form is the easiest to digest. Such formulas may
also contain enzymes for further help with digestion.
Antioxidants can help to neutralize damage by
the free radical actions thought to contribute to problems of aging. They are also helpful in preventing
and treating cancer and in treating cataracts and
glaucoma. Supplements that serve as antioxidants
include:


Vitamin E, 400–1,000 IUs daily. Protects cell membranes against damage. It shows promise in prevention against heart disease, and Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s diseases.



Selenium, 50 mg taken twice daily. Research suggests
that selenium may play a role in reducing the risk of
cancer.



Beta-carotene, 25,000–40,000 IUs daily. May help in
treating cancer, colds and flu, arthritis, and immune
support.



Vitamin C, 1,000–2,000 mg per day. It may cause
diarrhea in large doses. If this occurs, however, all
that is needed is a decrease in the dosage.

Other supplements that are helpful in treating agerelated problems including:


B12/B-complex vitamins, studies show that B12 may
help reduce mental symptoms, such as confusion,
memory loss, and depression.



Coenzyme Q10 may be helpful in treating heart disease, as up to three-quarters cardiac patients have
been found to be lacking in this heart enzyme.
Hormones

The following hormone supplements may be
taken to prevent or to treat various age-related problems. However, caution should be taken before
beginning treatment, and the patient should consult
his or her health care professional.
DHEA improves brain functioning and serves as a
building block for many other important hormones in
the body. It may be helpful in restoring declining
hormone levels and in building up muscle mass,
strengthening the bones, and maintaining a healthy
heart.
Melatonin may be helpful for insomnia. It has also
been used to help fight viruses and bacterial infections,
reduce the risk of heart disease, improve sexual functioning, and to protect against cancer.
Human growth hormone (hGH) has been shown
to regulate blood sugar levels and to stimulate bone,
cartilage, and muscle growth while reducing fat.
78

Herbs
Garlic (Allium sativa) is helpful in preventing
heart disease, as well as improving the tone and texture
of skin. Garlic stimulates liver and digestive system
functions, and also helps in dealing with heart disease
and high blood pressure.
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus)
supports the adrenal glands and immune functions.
It is believed to be helpful in treating problems related
to stress. Siberian ginseng also increases mental
and physical performance, and may be useful in treating memory loss, chronic fatigue, and immune
dysfunction.
Proanthocyanidins, or PCO, are Pycnogenol,
derived from grape seeds and skin, and from pine
tree bark, and may help in the prevention of cancer
and poor vision.
In Ayurvedic medicine, aging is described as a
process of increased vata, in which there is a tendency
to become thinner, drier, more nervous, more restless,
and more fearful, while having a loss of appetite
as well as sleep. Bananas, almonds, avocados, and
coconuts are some of the foods used in correcting
such conditions. One of the main herbs used for
such conditions is gotu kola (Centella asiatica),
which is used to revitalize the nervous system and
brain cells and to fortify the immune system. Gotu
kola is also used to treat memory loss, anxiety, and
insomnia.
In Chinese medicine, most symptoms of aging are
regarded as symptoms of a yin deficiency. Moistening
foods such as millet, barley soup, tofu, mung beans,
wheat germ, spirulina, potatoes, black sesame seeds,
walnuts, and flax seeds are recommended. Jing tonics
may also be used. These include deer antler, dodder
seeds, processed rehmannia, longevity soup, mussels,
and chicken.

Prevention
Preventive health practices such as healthy diet,
daily exercise, stress management, and control of lifestyle habits such as smoking and drinking, can
lengthen the life span and improve the quality of life
as people age. Exercise can improve the appetite, the
health of the bones, the emotional and mental outlook, and the digestion and circulation.
Drinking plenty of fluids aids in maintaining
healthy skin, good digestion, and proper elimination
of wastes. Up to eight glasses of water should be consumed daily, along with plenty of herbal teas, diluted
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Because of a decrease in the sense of taste, older
people often increase their intake of salt, which can
contribute to high blood pressure and nutrient loss.
Use of sugar is also increased. Seaweeds and small
amounts of honey can be used as replacements.
Alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine all have potential
damaging effects, and should be limited or completely
eliminated from consumption.
A diet high in fiber and low in fat is recommended.
Processed foods should be replaced by complex carbohydrates, such as whole grains. If chewing becomes
a problem, there should be an increased intake of
protein drinks, freshly juiced fruits and vegetables,
and creamed cereals.
Resources
OTHER

‘‘Anti-Aging-Nutritional Program.’’ December 28, 2000.
<http:// www.healthy.net/hwlibrarybooks/haas/
perform/antiagin.htm>.
‘‘Effects of Hormone in the Body.’’ December 28, 2000.
<http://www.anti-aging.org/Effects_hGH.html>.
‘‘The Elderly-Nutritional Programs.’’ December 28, 2000.
<http://www.healthy.net/hwlibrarybooks/haas/
lifestage/elderly.htm>.
‘‘Evaluating the Elderly Patient: the Case for Assessment
Technology.’’ December 28, 2000. <http://text.nlm.
nih.gov/nih/ta/www/01.html>.
‘‘Herbal Phytotherapy and the Elderly.’’ December 28, 2000.
<http://www.healthy.net/hwlibrarybooks/hoffman/
elders/elders.htm>.
‘‘Pharmacokinetics.’’ Merck & Co., Inc. (1995-2000).
December 28, 2000. <http://www.merck.com/pubs/
mmanual/section22/chapter304/304a.htm>.
‘‘To a Long and Healthy Life.’’ December 28, 2000. <http://
www.healthy.net/hwlibraryarticles/aesoph/
longandhealthy.htm>.

Patience Paradox

I Agoraphobia
Definition
The word agoraphobia is derived from Greek
words literally meaning ‘‘fear of the marketplace.’’
The term is used to describe an irrational and often
disabling fear of being out in public.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

KEY TERMS
Benzodiazepines—A group of tranquilizers often
used to treat anxiety.
Desensitization—A treatment for phobias which
involves exposing the phobic person to the feared
situation. It is often used in conjunction with
relaxation techniques.
Phobia—An intense and irrational fear of a specific
object, activity, or situation.

Description
Agoraphobia is just one type of phobia, or irrational fear. People with phobias feel dread or panic
when they face certain objects, situations, or activities.
People with agoraphobia frequently also experience
panic attacks, but panic attacks, or panic disorder,
are not a requirement for a diagnosis of agoraphobia.
The defining feature of agoraphobia is anxiety about
being in places from which escape might be embarrasing or difficult, or in which help might be unavailable.
The person suffering from agoraphobia usually avoids
the anxiety-provoking situation and may become
totally housebound.

Causes and symptoms
Agoraphobia is the most common type of phobia,
and it is estimated to affect between 5-12% of
Americans within their lifetime. Agoraphobia is
twice as common in women as in men and usually
strikes between the ages of 15-35.
The symptoms of the panic attacks which may
accompany agoraphobia vary from person to person,
and may include trembling, sweating, heart palpitations (a feeling of the heart pounding against the
chest), jitters, fatigue, tingling in the hands and feet,
nausea, a rapid pulse or breathing rate, and a sense of
impending doom.
Agoraphobia and other phobias are thought to be
the result of a number of physical and environmental
factors. For instance, they have been associated with
biochemical imbalances, especially related to certain neurotransmitters (chemical nerve messengers) in the brain.
People who have a panic attack in a given situation
(e.g., a shopping mall) may begin to associate the panic
with that situation and learn to avoid it. According to
some theories, irrational anxiety results from unresolved
emotional conflicts. All of these factors may play a
role to varying extents in different cases of agoraphobia.
79

Agoraphobia

fruit and vegetable juices, and fresh fruits and vegetables with high water content.

AIDS

Diagnosis
People who suffer from panic attacks should discuss the problem with a physician. The doctor can
diagnose the underlying panic or anxiety disorder
and make sure the symptoms aren’t related to some
other underlying medical condition.
The doctor makes the diagnosis of agoraphobia
based primarily on the patient’s description of his or
her symptoms. The person with agoraphobia experiences anxiety in situations where escape is difficult or
help is unavailable–or in certain situations, such as
being alone. While many people are somewhat apprehensive in these situations, the hallmark of agoraphobia is that a person’s active avoidance of the feared
situation impairs his or her ability to work, socialize,
or otherwise function.

Treatment
Treatment for agoraphobia usually consists of
both medication and psychotherapy. Usually,
patients can benefit from certain antidepressants,
such as amitriptyline (Elavil), or selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors, such as paroxetine (Paxil),
fluoxetine (Prozac), or sertraline (Zoloft). In addition, patients may manage panic attacks in progress
with certain tranquilizers called benzodiazepines,
such as alprazolam (Xanax) or clonazepam
(Klonipin).
The mainstay of treatment for agoraphobia and
other phobias is cognitive behavioral therapy. A
specific technique that is often employed is called
desensitization. The patient is gradually exposed to
the situation that usually triggers fear and avoidance,
and, with the help of breathing or relaxation techniques, learns to cope with the situation. This helps
break the mental connection between the situation and
the fear, anxiety, or panic. Patients may also benefit
from psychodynamically oriented psychotherapy,
discussing underlying emotional conflicts with a therapist or support group.

Prognosis
With proper medication and psychotherapy, 90%
of patients will find significant improvement in their
symptoms.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Forsyth, Sondra. ‘‘I Panic When I’m Alone.’’Mademoiselle
April 1998: 119-24.
80

ORGANIZATIONS

American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street NW,
Washington DC 20005. (888) 357-7924. <http://
www.psych.org>.
Anxiety Disorders Association of America. 11900 Park
Lawn Drive, Ste. 100, Rockville, MD 20852. (800)
545-7367. <http://www.adaa.org>.
National Institute of Mental Health. Mental Health Public
Inquiries, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 15C-05, Rockville,
MD 20857. (888) 826-9438. <http://
www.nimh.nih.gov>.

Robert Scott Dinsmoor

Agranulocytosis see Neutropenia

I AIDS
Definition
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is
an infectious disease caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). It was first recognized in the
United States in 1981. AIDS is the advanced form of
infection with the HIV virus, which may not cause
recognizable disease for a long period after the initial
exposure (latency). No vaccine is currently available to
prevent HIV infection. At present, all forms of AIDS
therapy are focused on improving the quality and
length of life for AIDS patients by slowing or halting
the replication of the virus and treating or preventing
infections and cancers that take advantage of a person’s weakened immune system.

Description
AIDS is considered one of the most devastating
public health problems in recent history. In June 2000,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) reported that 120,223 (includes only those
cases in areas that have confidential HIV reporting)
in the United States are HIV-positive, and 311,701 are
living with AIDS (includes only those cases where vital
status is known). Of these patients, 44% are gay or
bisexual men, 20% are heterosexual intravenous drug
users, and 17% are women. In addition, approximately 1,000-2,000 children are born each year with
HIV infection. The World Health Organization
(WHO) estimates that 33 million adults and 1.3 million children worldwide were living with HIV/AIDS as
of 1999 with 5.4 million being newly infected that year.
Most of these cases are in the developing countries of
Asia and Africa.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Risk virus
reaches entry
site

Risk virus
enters

Risk
inoculated

Moderate
Moderate
Low
Very low

Moderate
Moderate
Low
Very low

Very low
Low
Very low
Very low

Very high
Very low
Low

Very high
Very low
High

Very high
Very low
High

Low
High
High

Low
Low
High

Medium
Low
Very high

Blood:
Products
Shared needles
Accidental needle

High
High
Low

High
High
High

High
Very High
Low

Traumatic wound
Perinatal

Modest
High

High
High

High
High

Entry site
Conjuntiva
Oral mucosa
Nasal mucosa
Lower
respiratory
Anus
Skin, intact
Skin, broken
Sexual:
Vagina
Penis
Ulcers (STD)

Risk factors
AIDS can be transmitted in several ways. The risk
factors for HIV transmission vary according to category:






Sexual contact. Persons at greatest risk are those who
do not practice safe sex, those who are not monogamous, those who participate in anal intercourse, and
those who have sex with a partner with symptoms of
advanced HIV infection and/or other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). In the United States and
Europe, most cases of sexually transmitted HIV infection have resulted from homosexual contact, whereas
in Africa, the disease is spread primarily through sexual
intercourse among heterosexuals.
Transmission in pregnancy. High-risk mothers
include women married to bisexual men or men
who have an abnormal blood condition called hemophilia and require blood transfusions, intravenous
drug users, and women living in neighborhoods
with a high rate of HIV infection among heterosexuals. The chances of transmitting the disease to the
child are higher in women in advanced stages of the
disease. Breast feeding increases the risk of transmission by 10-20%. The use of zidovudine (AZT) during
pregnancy, however, can decrease the risk of transmission to the baby.
Exposure to contaminated blood or blood products.
With the introduction of blood product screening in
the mid-1980s, the incidence of HIV transmission in
blood transfusions has dropped to one in every 100,000

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE



Needle sticks among health care professionals.
Present studies indicate that the risk of HIV transmission by a needle stick is about one in 250. This
rate can be decreased if the injured worker is given
AZT, an anti-retroviral medication, in combination
with other medication.

HIV is not transmitted by handshakes or other
casual non-sexual contact, coughing or sneezing, or by
bloodsucking insects such as mosquitoes.
AIDS in women
AIDS in women is a serious public health concern.
Women exposed to HIV infection through heterosexual contact are the most rapidly growing risk
group in the United States population. The percentage
of AIDS cases diagnosed in women has risen from 7%
in 1985 to 23% in 1999. Women diagnosed with AIDS
may not live as long as men, although the reasons for
this finding are unclear.
AIDS in children
Since AIDS can be transmitted from an infected
mother to the child during pregnancy, during the birth
process, or through breast milk, all infants born to
HIV-positive mothers are a high-risk group. As of
2000, it was estimated that 87% of HIV-positive
women are of childbearing age; 41% of them are
drug abusers. Between 15-30% of children born to
HIV-positive women will be infected with the virus.
AIDS is one of the 10 leading causes of death in
children between one and four years of age. The interval between exposure to HIV and the development of
AIDS is shorter in children than in adults. Infants
infected with HIV have a 20-30% chance of developing AIDS within a year and dying before age three. In
the remainder, AIDS progresses more slowly; the
average child patient survives to seven years of age.
Some survive into early adolescence.

Causes and symptoms
Because HIV destroys immune system cells, AIDS
is a disease that can affect any of the body’s major
organ systems. HIV attacks the body through three
disease processes: immunodeficiency, autoimmunity,
and nervous system dysfunction.
81

AIDS

transfused. With respect to HIV transmission among
drug abusers, risk increases with the duration of using
injections, the frequency of needle sharing, the number of persons who share a needle, and the number of
AIDS cases in the local population.

Risk of acquiring HIV infection by entry site

AIDS
Mature HIV-1 viruses (above) and the lymphocyte from which they emerged (below). Two immature viruses can be seen budding
on the surface of the lymphocyte (right of center). (Photograph by Scott Camazir, Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by
permission.)

Immunodeficiency describes the condition in
which the body’s immune response is damaged, weakened, or is not functioning properly. In AIDS, immunodeficiency results from the way that the virus binds
to a protein called CD4, which is primarily found on
the surface of certain subtypes of white blood cells
called helper T cells or CD4 cells. After the virus has
attached to the CD4 receptor, the virus-CD4 complex
refolds to uncover another receptor called a chemokine receptor that helps to mediate entry of the virus
into the cell. One chemokine receptor in particular,
CCR5, has gotten recent attention after studies
showed that defects in its structure (caused by genetic
mutations) cause the progression of AIDS to be prevented or slowed. Scientists hope that this discovery
will lead to the development of drugs that trigger an
artificial mutation of the CCR5 gene or target the
CCR5 receptor.

functioning of the remaining CD4 cells. Because the
immune system cells are destroyed, many different
types of infections and cancers that take advantage
of a person’s weakened immune system (opportunistic) can develop.

Once HIV has entered the cell, it can replicate
intracellularly and kill the cell in ways that are still
not completely understood. In addition to killing some
lymphocytes directly, the AIDS virus disrupts the

Researchers do not know precisely how HIV
attacks the nervous system since the virus can cause
damage without infecting nerve cells directly. One
theory is that, once infected with HIV, one type of

82

Autoimmunity is a condition in which the body’s
immune system produces antibodies that work against
its own cells. Antibodies are specific proteins produced in response to exposure to a specific, usually
foreign, protein or particle called an antigen. In this
case, the body produces antibodies that bind to blood
platelets that are necessary for proper blood clotting
and tissue repair. Once bound, the antibodies mark the
platelets for removal from the body, and they are
filtered out by the spleen. Some AIDS patients develop
a disorder, called immune-related thrombocytopenia
purpura (ITP), in which the number of blood platelets
drops to abnormally low levels.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

AIDS

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISEASE

MUCOCUTANEOUS

PNEUMONIA

SKIN
DIARRHEA

OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS CAUSED BY AIDS
Because the immune system cells are destroyed by the AIDS virus, many different types of infections and cancers can develop,
taking advantage of a person’s weakened immune system. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

KEY TERMS
Acute retroviral syndrome—A group of symptoms
resembling mononucleosis that often are the first
sign of HIV infection in 50-70% of all patients and
45-90% of women.

Autoimmunity—A condition in which the body’s
immune system produces antibodies in response to
its own tissues or blood components instead of foreign particles or microorganisms.

AIDS dementia complex—A type of brain dysfunction caused by HIV infection that causes difficulty
thinking, confusion, and loss of muscular
coordination.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
immune system in response to a specific foreign
protein or particle called an antigen.

CCR5—A chemokine receptor; defects in its structure caused by genetic mutation cause the progression of AIDS to be prevented or slowed.
CD4—A type of protein molecule in human blood,
sometimes called the T4 antigen, that is present on
the surface of 65% of immune cells. The HIV virus
infects cells with CD4 surface proteins, and as a
result, depletes the number of T cells, B cells, natural
killer cells, and monocytes in the patient’s blood.

Antigen—Any substance that stimulates the body to
produce antibody.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

83

AIDS

Most of the damage to an AIDS patient’s immune
system is done by the virus’ destruction of CD4+
lymphocytes.
Chemokine receptor—A receptor on the surface of
some types of immune cells that helps to mediate
entry of HIV into the cell.
Hairy leukoplakia of the tongue—A white area of
diseased tissue on the tongue that may be flat or
slightly raised. It is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus
and is an important diagnostic sign of AIDS.
Hemophilia—Any of several hereditary blood coagulation disorders occurring almost exclusively in
males. Because blood does not clot properly, even
minor injuries can cause significant blood loss that
may require a blood transfusion, with its associated
minor risk of infection.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—A transmissible retrovirus that causes AIDS in humans. Two
forms of HIV are now recognized: HIV-1, which
causes most cases of AIDS in Europe, North and
South America, and most parts of Africa; and HIV-2,
which is chiefly found in West African patients.
HIV-2, discovered in 1986, appears to be less virulent
than HIV-1 and may also have a longer latency period.
Immunodeficient—A condition in which the body’s
immune response is damaged, weakened, or is not
functioning properly.
Kaposi’s sarcoma—A cancer of the connective tissue
that produces painless purplish red (in people with
light skin) or brown (in people with dark skin) blotches
on the skin. It is a major diagnostic marker of AIDS.
Latent period—Also called incubation period, the
time between infection with a disease-causing
agent and the development of disease.
Lymphocyte—A type of white blood cell that is important in the formation of antibodies and that can be used
to monitor the health of AIDS patients.
Lymphoma—A cancerous tumor in the lymphatic
system that is associated with a poor prognosis in
AIDS patients.
Macrophage—A large white blood cell, found primarily in the bloodstream and connective tissue, that
helps the body fight off infections by ingesting the
disease-causing organism. HIV can infect and kill
macrophages.
Monocyte—A large white blood cell that is formed
in the bone marrow and spleen. About 4% of the
white blood cells in normal adults are monocytes.

84

Mycobacterium avium (MAC) infection—A type
of opportunistic infection that occurs in about 40%
of AIDS patients and is regarded as an AIDS-defining
disease.
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors—
The newest class of antiretroviral drugs that work
by inhibiting the reverse transcriptase enzyme
necessary for HIV replication.
Nucleoside analogues—The first group of effective
anti-retroviral medications. They work by interfering
with the AIDS virus’ synthesis of DNA.
Opportunistic infection—An infection by organisms
that usually don’t cause infection in people whose
immune systems are working normally.
Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL)—A
condition in which HIV continues to produce
chronic painless swellings in the lymph nodes during
the latency period.
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP)—An
opportunistic infection caused by a fungus that is a
major cause of death in patients with late-stage
AIDS.
Progressive
multifocal
leukoencephalopathy
(PML)—A disease caused by a virus that destroys
white matter in localized areas of the brain. It is
regarded as an AIDS-defining illness.
Protease inhibitors—The second major category of
drug used to treat AIDS that works by suppressing the
replication of the HIV virus.
Protozoan—A single-celled, usually microscopic
organism that is eukaryotic and, therefore, different
from bacteria (prokaryotic).
Retrovirus—A virus that contains a unique enzyme
called reverse transcriptase that allows it to replicate
within new host cells.
T cells—Lymphocytes that originate in the thymus
gland. T cells regulate the immune system’s response
to infections, including HIV. CD4 lymphocytes are a
subset of T lymphocytes.
Thrush—A yeast infection of the mouth characterized by white patches on the inside of the mouth and
cheeks.
Viremia—The measurable presence of virus in the
bloodstream that is a characteristic of acute retroviral
syndrome.
Wasting syndrome—A progressive loss of weight
and muscle tissue caused by the AIDS virus.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The course of AIDS generally progresses through
three stages, although not all patients will follow this
progression precisely:
Acute retroviral syndrome
Acute retroviral syndrome is a term used to
describe a group of symptoms that can resemble
mononucleosis and that may be the first sign of HIV
infection in 50-70% of all patients and 45-90% of
women. Most patients are not recognized as infected
during this phase and may not seek medical attention.
The symptoms may include fever, fatigue, muscle
aches, loss of appetite, digestive disturbances, weight
loss, skin rashes, headache, and chronically swollen
lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). Approximately 2533% of patients will experience a form of meningitis
during this phase in which the membranes that cover
the brain and spinal cord become inflamed. Acute
retroviral syndrome develops between one and six
weeks after infection and lasts for two to three
weeks. Blood tests during this period will indicate the
presence of virus (viremia) and the appearance of the
viral p24 antigen in the blood.

or ulcers, or other infections of the mouth; diarrhea
and other gastrointestinal symptoms that cause malnutrition and weight loss; diseases of the lungs and
kidneys; and degeneration of the nerve fibers in the
arms and legs. HIV infection of the nervous system
leads to general loss of strength, loss of reflexes, and
feelings of numbness or burning sensations in the feet
or lower legs.
Late-stage disease (AIDS)
AIDS is usually marked by a very low number of
CD4+ lymphocytes, followed by a rise in the frequency of opportunistic infections and cancers.
Doctors monitor the number and proportion of
CD4+ lymphocytes in the patient’s blood in order to
assess the progression of the disease and the effectiveness of different medications. About 10% of infected
individuals never progress to this overt stage of the
disease and are referred to as nonprogressors.
OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS. Once the patient’s
CD4+ lymphocyte count falls below 200 cells/mm 3,
he or she is at risk for a variety of opportunistic infections. The infectious organisms may include the
following:


Fungi. The most common fungal disease associated
with AIDS is Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP).
PCP is the immediate cause of death in 15-20% of
AIDS patients. It is an important measure of a
patient’s prognosis. Other fungal infections include
a yeast infection of the mouth (candidiasis or thrush)
and cryptococcal meningitis.



Protozoa. Toxoplasmosis is a common opportunistic
infection in AIDS patients that is caused by a protozoan. Other diseases in this category include isoporiasis and cryptosporidiosis.



Mycobacteria. AIDS patients may develop tuberculosis or MAC infections. MAC infections are caused
by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, and occur in
about 40% of AIDS patients. It is rare until CD4+
counts falls below 50 cells/mm3.



Bacteria. AIDS patients are likely to develop bacterial infections of the skin and digestive tract.



Viruses. AIDS patients are highly vulnerable to cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV),
varicella zoster virus (VZV), and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infections. Another virus, JC virus, causes
progressive destruction of brain tissue in the brain
stem, cerebrum, and cerebellum (multifocal leukoencephalopathy or PML), which is regarded as an
AIDS-defining illness by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.

Latency period
After the HIV virus enters a patient’s lymph nodes
during the acute retroviral syndrome stage, the disease
becomes latent for as many as 10 years or more before
symptoms of advanced disease develop. During
latency, the virus continues to replicate in the lymph
nodes, where it may cause one or more of the following
conditions:
PERSISTENT GENERALIZED LYMPHADENOPATHY
(PGL). Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy, or

PGL, is a condition in which HIV continues to produce chronic painless swellings in the lymph nodes
during the latency period. The lymph nodes that are
most frequently affected by PGL are those in the areas
of the neck, jaw, groin, and armpits. PGL affects
between 50-70% of patients during latency.
CONSTITUTIONAL SYMPTOMS. Many patients will
develop low-grade fevers, chronic fatigue, and general
weakness. HIV may also cause a combination of food
malabsorption, loss of appetite, and increased metabolism that contribute to the so-called AIDS wasting
or wasting syndrome.
OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS. At any time during the
course of HIV infection, patients may suffer from a
yeast infection in the mouth called thrush, open sores

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

85

AIDS

immune system cell, called a macrophage, begins to
release a toxin that harms the nervous system.

AIDS

AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX AND NEUROLOGIC
COMPLICATIONS. AIDS dementia complex is usually

a late complication of the disease. It is unclear whether
it is caused by the direct effects of the virus on the
brain or by intermediate causes. AIDS dementia complex is marked by loss of reasoning ability, loss of
memory, inability to concentrate, apathy and loss of
initiative, and unsteadiness or weakness in walking.
Some patients also develop seizures. There are no
specific treatments for AIDS dementia complex.
MUSCULOSKELETAL COMPLICATIONS. Patients in
late-stage AIDS may develop inflammations of the
muscles, particularly in the hip area, and may have
arthritis-like pains in the joints.
ORAL SYMPTOMS. In addition to thrush and painful ulcers in the mouth, patients may develop a condition called hairy leukoplakia of the tongue. This
condition is also regarded by the CDC as an indicator
of AIDS. Hairy leukoplakia is a white area of diseased
tissue on the tongue that may be flat or slightly raised.
It is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus.
AIDS-RELATED CANCERS. Patients with late-stage

AIDS may develop Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), a skin
tumor that primarily affects homosexual men. KS is
the most common AIDS-related malignancy. It is
characterized by reddish-purple blotches or patches
(brownish in African-Americans) on the skin or in
the mouth. About 40% of patients with KS develop
symptoms in the digestive tract or lungs. KS may be
caused by a herpes virus-like sexually transmitted disease agent rather than HIV.
The second most common form of cancer in AIDS
patients is a tumor of the lymphatic system (lymphoma). AIDS-related lymphomas often affect the
central nervous system and develop very aggressively.
Invasive cancer of the cervix (related to certain
types of human papilloma virus [HPV]) is an important diagnostic marker of AIDS in women.
While incidence of AIDS-defining cancers such as
Kaposi’s sarcoma and cervical cancer have decreased
since increase use of antiretroviral therapy, other cancers has increased in AIDS patients. People with HIV
has shown higher incidence of lung cancer, head and
neck cancers, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, melanoma, and
anorectal cancer from 1992 to 2002.

Diagnosis
Because HIV infection produces such a wide
range of symptoms, the CDC has drawn up a list
of 34 conditions regarded as defining AIDS. The
86

physician will use the CDC list to decide whether the
patient falls into one of these three groups:


definitive diagnoses with or without laboratory evidence of HIV infection



definitive diagnoses with laboratory evidence of HIV
infection



presumptive diagnoses with laboratory evidence of
HIV infection.
Physical findings

Almost all the symptoms of AIDS can occur with
other diseases. The general physical examination may
range from normal findings to symptoms that are
closely associated with AIDS. These symptoms are
hairy leukoplakia of the tongue and Kaposi’s sarcoma. When the doctor examines the patient, he or
she will look for the overall pattern of symptoms
rather than any one finding.
Laboratory tests for HIV infection
BLOOD TESTS (SEROLOGY). The first blood test
for AIDS was developed in 1985. At present, patients
who are being tested for HIV infection are usually
given an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) test for the presence of HIV antibody in
their blood. Positive ELISA results are then tested
with a Western blot or immunofluorescence (IFA)
assay for confirmation. The combination of the
ELISA and Western blot tests is more than 99.9%
accurate in detecting HIV infection within four to
eight weeks following exposure. The polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) test can be used to detect the
presence of viral nucleic acids in the very small number
of HIV patients who have false-negative results on the
ELISA and Western blot tests. These tests are also
used to detect viruses and bacterium other than HIV
and AIDS.
OTHER LABORATORY TESTS. In addition to diagnostic blood tests, there are other blood tests that are
used to track the course of AIDS in patients that have
already been diagnosed. These include blood counts,
viral load tests, p24 antigen assays, and measurements
of 2-microglobulin ( 2M).

Doctors will use a wide variety of tests to diagnose
the presence of opportunistic infections, cancers, or
other disease conditions in AIDS patients. Tissue
biopsies, samples of cerebrospinal fluid, and sophisticated imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and computed tomography scans (CT)
are used to diagnose AIDS-related cancers, some
opportunistic infections, damage to the central
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

zalcitabine (ddC), stavudine (d4T), lamivudine
(3TC), and abacavir (ABC).


Protease inhibitors. Protease inhibitors can be effective against HIV strains that have developed resistance to nucleoside analogues, and are often used in
combination with them. These compounds include
saquinavir, ritonavir, indinavir, nelfinavir, amprenavir, and lopinavir..



Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. This
is a new class of antiretroviral agents. Three are
available, nevirapine, which was approved first, delavirdine and efavirin.



Fusion inhibitors, the newest class of antiretrovirals.
They block specific proteins on the surface of the
virus or the CD4 cell. These proteins help the virus
gain entry into the cell.The only FDA approved
fusion inhibitor as of spring 2004 was enfuvirtide.

Diagnosis in children
Diagnostic blood testing in children older than 18
months is similar to adult testing, with ELISA screening confirmed by Western blot. Younger infants can
be diagnosed by direct culture of the HIV virus, PCR
testing, and p24 antigen testing.
In terms of symptoms, children are less likely than
adults to have an early acute syndrome. They are,
however, likely to have delayed growth, a history of
frequent illness, recurrent ear infections, a low blood
cell count, failure to gain weight, and unexplained
fevers. Children with AIDS are more likely to develop
bacterial infections, inflammation of the lungs, and
AIDS-related brain disorders than are HIV-positive
adults.

Treatment
Treatment for AIDS covers four considerations:
TREATMENT OF OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS AND
MALIGNANCIES. Most AIDS patients require complex

long-term treatment with medications for infectious
diseases. This treatment is often complicated by the
development of resistance in the disease organisms.
AIDS-related malignancies in the central nervous system are usually treated with radiation therapy.
Cancers elsewhere in the body are treated with
chemotherapy.
PROPHYLACTIC TREATMENT FOR OPPORTUNISTIC
INFECTIONS. Prophylactic treatment is treatment that

is given to prevent disease. AIDS patients with a history of Pneumocystis pneumonia; with CD4+ counts
below 200 cells/mm3 or 14% of lymphocytes; weight
loss; or thrush should be given prophylactic medications. The three drugs given are trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole, dapsone, or pentamidine in aerosol
form.
ANTI-RETROVIRAL TREATMENT. In

recent years
researchers have developed drugs that suppress HIV
replication, as distinct from treating its effects on the
body. These drugs fall into four classes:


Nucleotide analogues. These drugs work by interfering with the action of HIV reverse transcriptase
inside infected cells, thus ending the virus’ replication
process. These drugs include zidovudine (sometimes
called azidothymidine or AZT), didanosine (ddI),

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment guidelines for these agents are in constant change as new medications are developed and
introduced. Two principles currently guide doctors in
working out drug regimens for AIDS patients: using
combinations of drugs rather than one medication
alone; and basing treatment decisions on the results
of the patient’s viral load tests.
STIMULATION OF BLOOD CELL PRODUCTION.

Because many patients with AIDS suffer from abnormally low levels of both red and white blood cells,
they may be given medications to stimulate blood cell
production. Epoetin alfa (erythropoietin) may be
given to anemic patients. Patients with low white
blood cell counts may be given filgrastim or
sargramostim.
Treatment in women
Treatment of pregnant women with HIV is particularly important in that anti-retroviral therapy
has been shown to reduce transmission to the infant
by 65%.

Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for AIDS can be grouped
into two categories: those intended to help the immune
system and those aimed at pain control. Treatments
that may enhance the function of the immune system
include Chinese herbal medicine and western herbal
medicine, macrobiotic and other special diets, guided
imagery and creative visualization, homeopathy, and
vitamin therapy. Pain control therapies include hydrotherapy, reiki, acupuncture, meditation, chiropractic
treatments, and therapeutic massage. Alternative
87

AIDS

nervous system, and wasting of the muscles. Urine and
stool samples are used to diagnose infections caused
by parasites. AIDS patients are also given blood tests
for syphilis and other sexually transmitted diseases.

AIDS tests

therapies can also be used to help with side effects of
the medications used in the treatment of AIDS.

Prognosis
At the present time, there is no cure for AIDS.
Treatment stresses aggressive combination drug
therapy for those patients with access to the expensive medications and who tolerate them adequately.
The use of these multi-drug therapies has significantly reduced the numbers of deaths, in this country,
resulting from AIDS. The data is still inconclusive,
but the potential exists to possibly prolong life
indefinitely using these and other drug therapies to
boost the immune system, keep the virus from replicating, and ward off opportunistic infections and
malignancies.
Prognosis after the latency period depends on the
patient’s specific symptoms and the organ systems
affected by the disease. Patients with AIDS-related
lymphomas of the central nervous system die within
two to three months of diagnosis; those with systemic
lymphomas may survive for eight to ten months.



If someone suspects HIV infection, he or she
should be tested for HIV. If treated aggressively
and early, the development of AIDS may be postponed indefinitely. If HIV infection is confirmed, it
is also vital to let sexual partners know so that they
can be tested and, if necessary, receive medical
attention.

Resources
PERIODICALS

Boschert, Sherry. ‘‘Some Ca Increasing in Post-HAART
Era.’’ Clinical Psychiatry News June 2004: 75.
Godwin, Catherine. ‘‘WhatÆs New in the Fight Against
AIDS.’’ RN April 2004: 46–54.
ORGANIZATIONS

Gay Men’s Health Crisis, Inc., 129 West 20th Street, New
York, NY 10011-0022. (212) 807-6655.
National AIDS Hot Line. (800) 342-AIDS (English). (800)
344-SIDA (Spanish). (800) AIDS-TTY (hearingimpaired).
OTHER

‘‘FDA Approved Drugs for HIV Infection and AIDSRelatedConditions.’’ HIV/AIDS Treatment Information
Service website. January 2001.<http://hivatis.org>.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Teresa G. Odle

Prevention
As of 2005, there was no vaccine effective against
AIDS. Several vaccines are currently being investigated, however, both to prevent initial HIV infection
and as a therapeutic treatment to prevent HIV from
progressing to full-blown AIDS.
In the meantime, there are many things that can
be done to prevent the spread of AIDS:


Being monogamous and practice safe sex.
Individuals must be instructed in the proper use of
condoms and urged to practice safe sex. Besides
avoiding the risk of HIV infection, condoms are
successful in preventing other sexually transmitted
diseases and unwanted pregnancies. Before engaging
in a sexual relationship with someone, getting tested
for HIV infection is recommended.



Avoiding needle sharing among intravenous drug
users.



Although blood and blood products are carefully
monitored, those individuals who are planning to
undergo major surgery may wish to donate blood
ahead of time to prevent a risk of infection from a
blood transfusion.



Healthcare professionals must take all necessary precautions by wearing gloves and masks when handling body fluids and preventing needle-stick injuries.

88

AIDS serology see AIDS tests

I AIDS tests
Definition
AIDS tests, short for acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome tests, cover a number of different procedures used in the diagnosis and treatment of HIV
patients. These tests sometimes are called AIDS
serology tests. Serology is the branch of immunology
that deals with the contents and characteristics of
blood serum. Serum is the clear light yellow part
of blood that remains liquid when blood cells form
a clot. AIDS serology evaluates the presence of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in
blood serum and its effects on each patient’s immune
system.

Purpose
AIDS serology serves several different purposes.
Some AIDS tests are used to diagnose patients or
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

AIDS tests

confirm a diagnosis; others are used to measure the
progression of the disease or the effectiveness of specific treatment regimens. Some AIDS tests also can be
used to screen blood donations for safe use in
transfusions.
In order to understand the different purposes
of the blood tests used with AIDS patients, it is helpful to understand how HIV infection affects human
blood and the immune system. HIV is a retrovirus that
enters the blood stream of a new host in the following
ways:


by sexual contact



by contact with infected body fluids (such as blood
and urine)



by transmission during pregnancy, or



through transfusion of infected blood products

A retrovirus is a virus that contains a unique
enzyme called reverse transcriptase that allows it to
replicate within new host cells. The virus binds to a
protein called CD4, which is found on the surface of
certain subtypes of white blood cells, including helper
T cells, macrophages, and monocytes. Once HIV
enters the cell, it can replicate and kill the cell in
ways that are still not completely understood. In addition to killing some lymphocytes directly, the AIDS
virus disrupts the functioning of the remaining CD4
cells. CD4 cells ordinarily produce a substance called
interleukin-2 (IL-2), which stimulates other cells
(T cells and B cells) in the human immune system
to respond to infections. Without the IL-2, T cells do
not reproduce as they normally would in response to the
HIV virus, and B cells are not stimulated to respond
to the infection.

Precautions
In some states such as New York, a signed consent
form is needed in order to administer an AIDS test. As
with all blood tests, healthcare professionals should
always wear latex gloves and avoid being pricked by
the needle used in drawing blood for the tests. It may
be difficult to get blood from a habitual intravenous
drug user due to collapsed veins.

Description
Diagnostic tests
Diagnostic blood tests for AIDS usually are given
to persons in high-risk populations who may have
been exposed to HIV or who have the early symptoms
of AIDS. Most persons infected with HIV will develop
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

A three-dimensional model of the HIV virus. (Corbis
Corporation (New York). Reproduced by permission.)

a detectable level of antibody within three months of
infection. The condition of testing positive for HIV
antibody in the blood is called seroconversion, and
persons who have become HIV-positive are called
seroconverters.
It is possible to diagnose HIV infection by isolating the virus itself from a blood sample or by demonstrating the presence of HIV antigen in the blood.
Viral culture, however, is expensive, not widely available, and slow—it takes 28 days to complete the viral
culture test. More common are blood tests that work
by detecting the presence of antibodies to the HIV
virus. These tests are inexpensive, widely available,
and accurate in detecting 99.9% of AIDS infections
when used in combination to screen patients and
confirm diagnoses.
ENZYME-LINKED IMMUNOSORBENT ASSAY (ELISA).

This type of blood test is used to screen blood for
transfusions as well as diagnose patients. An ELISA
test for HIV works by attaching HIV antigens to a
plastic well or beads. A sample of the patient’s blood
serum is added, and excess proteins are removed.
A second antibody coupled to an enzyme is added,
followed by addition of a substance that will cause
the enzyme to react by forming a color. An instrument called a spectrophotometer can measure the
color. The name of the test is derived from the use
of the enzyme that is coupled or linked to the second
antibody.
89

AIDS tests

KEY TERMS
Antibody—A protein in the blood that identifies and
helps remove disease organisms or their toxins.
Antibodies are secreted by B cells. AIDS diagnostic
tests work by demonstrating the presence of HIV
antibody in the patient’s blood.

South America, and most parts of Africa; and
HIV-2, which is chiefly found in West African
patients. HIV-2, discovered in 1986, appears to be
less virulent than HIV-1, but also may have a longer
latency period.

Antigen—Any substance that stimulates the body to
produce antibodies.
B cell—A type of white blood cell derived from bone
marrow. B cells are sometimes called B lymphocytes. They secrete antibody and have a number of
other complex functions within the human immune
system.

Immunofluorescent assay (IFA)—A blood test sometimes used to confirm ELISA results instead of using
the Western blotting. In an IFA test, HIV antigen is
mixed with a fluorescent compound and then with a
sample of the patient’s blood. If HIV antibody is
present, the mixture will fluoresce when examined
under ultraviolet light.
Lymphocyte—A type of white blood cell that is
important in the formation of antibodies. Doctors
can monitor the health of AIDS patients by measuring the number or proportion of certain types of
lymphocytes in the patient’s blood.
Macrophage—A large white blood cell, found primarily in the bloodstream and connective tissue, that
helps the body fight off infections by ingesting the
disease organism. HIV can infect and kill
macrophages.

CD4—A type of protein molecule in human blood
that is present on the surface of 65% of human
T cells. CD4 is a receptor for the HIV virus. When
the HIV virus infects cells with CD4 surface proteins, it
depletes the number of T cells, B cells, natural killer
cells, and monocytes in the patient’s blood. Most of
the damage to an AIDS patient’s immune system is
done by the virus’ destruction of CD4+ lymphocytes.
CD4 is sometimes called the T4 antigen.
Complete blood count (CBC)—A routine analysis
performed on a sample of blood taken from the
patient’s vein with a needle and vacuum tube. The
measurements taken in a CBC include a white blood
cell count, a red blood cell count, the red cell distribution width, the hematocrit (ratio of the volume
of the red blood cells to the blood volume), and the
amount of hemoglobin (the blood protein that carries
oxygen). CBCs are a routine blood test used for many
medical reasons, not only for AIDS patients. They
can help the doctor determine if a patient is in
advanced stages of the disease.
Electrophoresis—A method of separating complex
protein molecules suspended in a gel by running an
electric current through the gel.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)—A
diagnostic blood test used to screen patients for
AIDS or other viruses. The patient’s blood is mixed
with antigen attached to a plastic tube or bead surface. A sample of the patient’s blood serum is added,
and excess proteins are removed. A second antibody
coupled to an enzyme is added, followed by a chemical that will cause a color reaction that can be
measured by a special instrument.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—A transmissible retrovirus that causes AIDS in humans. Two
forms of HIV are now recognized: HIV-1, which
causes most cases of AIDS in Europe, North and

90

Monocyte—A large white blood cell that is formed
in the bone marrow and spleen. About 4% of the
white blood cells in normal adults are monocytes.
Opportunistic infection—An infection that develops
only when a person’s immune system is weakened,
as happens to AIDS patients.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)—A test performed
to evaluate false-negative results to the ELISA and
Western blot tests. In PCR testing, numerous copies
of a gene are made by separating the two strands of
DNA containing the gene segment, marking its location, using DNA polymerase to make a copy, and
then continuously replicating the copies. The amplification of gene sequences that are associated with
HIV allows for detection of the virus by this method.
Retrovirus—A virus that contains a unique enzyme
called reverse transcriptase that allows it to replicate
within new host cells.
Seroconversion—The change from HIV- negative to
HIV-positive status during blood testing. Persons
who are HIV-positive are called seroconverters.
Serology—The analysis of the contents and properties of blood serum.
Serum—The part of human blood that remains liquid
when blood cells form a clot. Human blood serum is
clear light yellow in color.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Viral load test—A new blood test for monitoring the
speed of HIV replication in AIDS patients. The viral
load test is based on PCR techniques and supplements the CD4+ cell count tests.
Western blot—A technique developed in 1979 that
is used to confirm ELISA results. HIV antigen is purified by electrophoresis and attached by blotting to a
nylon or nitrocellulose filter. The patient’s serum is

The latest generation of ELISA tests are 99.5%
sensitive to HIV. Occasionally, the ELISA test will be
positive for a patient without symptoms of AIDS from
a low-risk group. Because this result is likely to be a
false-positive, the ELISA must be repeated on the same
sample of the patient’s blood. If the second ELISA is
positive, the result should be confirmed by the
Western blot test.
WESTERN BLOT (IMMUNOBLOT). The Western blot
or immunoblot test is used as a reference procedure to
confirm the diagnosis of AIDS. In Western blot testing, HIV antigen is purified by electrophoresis (large
protein molecules are suspended in a gel and separated
from one another by running an electric current
through the gel). The HIV antigens are attached by
blotting to a nylon or nitrocellulose filter. The
patient’s serum is reacted against the filter, followed
by treatment with developing chemicals that allow
HIV antibody to show up as a colored patch or blot.
A commercially produced Western blot test for HIV-1
is now available. It consists of a prefabricated
strip that is incubated with a sample of the patient’s
blood serum and the developing chemicals. About
nine different HIV-1 proteins can be detected in
the blots.

When used in combination with ELISA testing,
Western blot testing is 99.9% specific. It can, however,
yield false negatives in patients with very early HIV
infection and in those infected by HIV-2. In some
patients the Western blot yields indeterminate results.
IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE ASSAY (IFA). This method
is sometimes used to confirm ELISA results instead of
Western blotting. An IFA test detects the presence of
HIV antibody in a sample of the patient’s serum by
mixing HIV antigen with a fluorescent chemical, adding the blood sample, and observing the reaction
under a microscope with ultraviolet light.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

reacted against the filter, followed by treatment with
developing chemicals that allow HIV antibody to
show up as a colored patch or blot. If the patient is
HIV-positive, there will be stripes at specific locations for two or more viral proteins. A negative result
is blank.
WBC differential—A white blood cell count in
which the technician classifies the different white
blood cells by type as well as calculating the
number of each type. A WBC differential is necessary to calculate the absolute CD4+ lymphocyte
count.

POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION (PCR). This test is
used to evaluate the very small number of AIDS
patients with false-negative ELISA and Western blot
tests. These patients are sometimes called antibodynegative asymptomatic (without symptoms) carriers,
because they do not have any symptoms of AIDS and
there is no detectable quantity of antibody in the blood
serum. Antibody-negative asymptomatic carriers may
be responsible for the very low ongoing risk of HIV
infection transmitted by blood transfusions. It is estimated that the risk is between 1 in 10,000 and 1 in
100,000 units of transfused blood.

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test can
measure the presence of viral nucleic acids in the
patient’s blood even when there is no detectable antibody to HIV. This test works by amplifying the presence of HIV nucleic acids in a blood sample.
Numerous copies of a gene are made by separating
the two strands of DNA containing the gene segment,
marking its location, using DNA polymerase to make
a copy, and then continuously replicating the copies. It
is questionable whether PCR will replace Western
blotting as the method of confirming AIDS diagnoses.
Although PCR can detect the low number of persons
(1%) with HIV infections that have not yet generated
an antibody response to the virus, the overwhelming
majority of infected persons will be detected by ELISA
screening within one to three months of infection.
In addition, PCR testing is based on present knowledge of the genetic sequences in HIV. Since the virus
is continually generating new variants, PCR testing
could yield a false negative in patients with these
new variants. In 2004, researchers reported on a new
test that was more sensitive to HIV, detecting the
infection in as little as 12 days after infection.
However, the manufacturer was still seeking FDA
approval for the test, which would cost about the
same as PCR testing.
91

AIDS tests

T cells—Lymphocytes that originate in the thymus
gland. T cells regulate the immune system’s response
to infections, including HIV. CD4 lymphocytes are a
subset of T lymphocytes.

AIDS tests

In 1999, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved an HIV home testing kit. The kit
contained multiple components, including material
for specimen collection, a mailing envelope to send
the specimen to a laboratory for analysis, and provides
pre- and post-test counseling. It uses a finger prick
process for blood collection. Other tests have been in
development that would allow patients to monitor
their own therapy in the home without sending out
for results.

the patient’s white blood cell count (WBC) by the
percentage of lymphocytes among the white blood
cells, and multiplying the result by the percentage
of lymphocytes bearing the CD4+ marker. An absolute count below 200-300 CD+4 lymphocytes
in 1 cubic millimeter (mm3) of blood indicates that
the patient is vulnerable to some opportunistic
infections.


Prognostic tests
Blood tests to evaluate patients already diagnosed
with HIV infection are as important as the diagnostic
tests. Because AIDS has a long latency period, some
persons may be infected with the virus for 10 years or
longer before they develop symptoms of AIDS. These
patients are sometimes called antibody-positive
asymptomatic carriers. Prognostic tests also help
drug researchers evaluate the usefulness of new medications in treating AIDS.
BLOOD CELL COUNTS. Doctors can measure the
number or proportion of certain types of cells in an
AIDS patient’s blood to see whether and how rapidly
the disease is progressing, or whether certain treatments are helping the patient. These cell count tests
include:




Complete blood count (CBC). A CBC is a routine
analysis performed on a sample of blood taken
from the patient’s vein with a needle and vacuum
tube. The measurements taken in a CBC include a
white blood cell count (WBC), a red blood cell count
(RBC), the red cell distribution width, the hematocrit
(ratio of the volume of the red blood cells to the
blood volume), and the amount of hemoglobin (the
blood protein that carries oxygen). Although CBCs
are used on more than just AIDS patients, they can
help the doctor determine if an AIDS patient has an
advanced form of the disease. Specific AIDS-related
signs in a CBC include a low hematocrit, a sharp
decrease in the number of blood platelets, and a
low level of a certain type of white blood cell called
neutrophils.
Absolute CD4+ lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a
type of white blood cell that is important in the
formation of an immune response. Because HIV
targets CD4+ lymphocytes, their number in the
patient’s blood can be used to track the course of
the infection. This blood cell count is considered the
most accurate indicator for the presence of an opportunistic infection in an AIDS patient. The absolute
CD4+ lymphocyte count is obtained by multiplying

92

CD4+ lymphocyte percentage. Some doctors think
that this is a more accurate test than the absolute
count because the percentage does not depend on a
manual calculation of the number of types of different white blood cells. A white blood cell count that is
broken down into categories in this way is called a
WBC differential.

It is important for doctors treating AIDS patients
to measure the lymphocyte count on a regular basis.
Experts consulted by the United States Public Health
Service recommend the following frequency of serum
testing based on the patient’s CD4+ level:
CD4+ count more than 600 cells/mm3: Every six
months.



CD4+ count between 200-600 cells/mm3: Every
three months.



CD4+ count less than 200 cells/mm3: Every three
months.



When the CD4+ count falls below 200 cells/mm3,
the doctor will put the patient on a medication regimen to protect him or her against opportunistic
infections.
HIV VIRAL LOAD TESTS. Another type of blood test
for monitoring AIDS patients is the viral load test. It
supplements the CD4+ count, which can tell the doctor the extent of the patient’s loss of immune function,
but not the speed of HIV replication in the body. The
viral load test is based on PCR techniques and can
measure the number of copies of HIV nucleic acids.
Successive test results for a given patient’s viral load
are calculated on a base 10 logarithmic scale.
ORAL HIV TESTS. Scientists have developed oral
HIV tests that can be conducted with saliva samples.
One of the unintented effects of these tests is the
misperception that HIV can be transmitted through
saliva. Still, they present an excellent alternative to
blood sample testing.
RAPID HIV TESTS. Researchers constantly work on
more rapid tests for HIV that can be done in physician
offices or by less skilled people and more convenient
locations in developing countries. A finger-stick test
that can be read quickly from a whole blood sample
had shown promising results in the fall of 2003.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

In 2004, a new three-minute test for HIV was
lunched in the United States under FDA approval.
The hope of this test is that health care providers
such as family practice physician offices can quickly
test a patient in the office and provide results while the
patient waits, rather than sending results to a lab.
BETA2-MICROGLOBULIN (BETA2M). Beta-microglo-

bulin is a protein found on the surface of all human
cells with a nucleus. It is released into the blood when a
cell dies. Although rising blood levels of 2M are found
in patients with cancer and other serious diseases, a
rising 2M blood level can be used to measure the
progression of AIDS.
P24 ANTIGEN CAPTURE ASSAY. Found in the viral
core of HIV, p24 is a protein that can be measured by
the ELISA technique. Doctors can use p24 assays to
measure the antiviral activity of the patient’s medications. In addition, the p24 assay is sometimes useful
in detecting HIV infection before seroconversion.
However, p24 is consistently present in only 25% of
persons infected with HIV.
GENOTYPIC DRUG RESISTANCE TEST. Genotypic
testing can help determine whether specific gene
mutations, common in people with HIV, are causing
drug resistance and drug failure. The test looks for
specific genetic mutations within the virus that are
known to cause resistance to certain drugs used in
HIV treatment. For example the drug 3TC, also
known as lamivudine (Epivir), is not effective against
strains of HIV that have a mutation at a particular
position on the reverse transcriptase protein—amino
acid 184—known as M184V (M!V, methionine to
valine). So if the genotypic resistance test shows a
mutation at position M184V, it is likely the person
is resistant to 3TC and not likely to respond to 3TC
treatment. Genotypic tests are only effective if the
person is already taking antiviral medication and if
the viral load is greater than 1,000 copies per milliliter
(mL) of blood. The cost of the test, usually between
$300 and $500, is usually now covered by many insurance plans.
PHENOTYPIC

DRUG

RESISTANCE

TESTING.

Phenotypic testing directly measures the sensitivity of
a patient’s HIV to particular drugs and drug combinations. To do this, it measures the concentration of a
drug required to inhibit viral replication in the test
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

tube. This is the same method used by researchers to
determine whether a drug might be effective against
HIV before using it in human clinical trials.
Phenotypic testing is a more direct measurement of
resistance than genotypic testing. Also, unlike genotypic testing, phenotypic testing does not require a high
viral load but it is recommended that persons already
be taking antiretroviral drugs. The cost is between $700
and $900 and is now covered by many insurance plans.
AIDS serology in children
Children born to HIV-infected mothers may
acquire the infection through the mother’s placenta
or during the birth process. Public health experts
recommend the testing and monitoring of all children
born to mothers with HIV. Diagnostic testing in children older than 18 months is similar to adult testing,
with ELISA screening confirmed by Western blot.
Younger infants can be diagnosed by direct culture
of the HIV virus, PCR testing, and p24 antigen testing.
These techniques allow a pediatrician to identify 50%
of infected children at or near birth, and 95% of cases
in infants three to six months of age.

Preparation
Preparation and aftercare are important parts of
AIDS diagnostic testing. Doctors are now advised to
take the patient’s emotional, social, economic, and
other circumstances into account and to provide counseling before and after testing. Patients are generally
better able to cope with the results if the doctor has
spent some time with them before the blood test
explaining the basic facts about HIV infection and
testing. Many doctors now offer this type of informational counseling before performing the tests.

Aftercare
If the test results indicate that the patient is HIVpositive, he or she will need counseling, information,
referral for treatment, and support. Doctors can either
counsel the patient themselves or invite an experienced
HIV counselor to discuss the results of the blood tests
with the patient. They also will assess the patient’s
emotional and psychological status, including the possibility of violent behavior and the availability of a
support network.

Risks
The risks of AIDS testing are primarily related to
disclosure of the patient’s HIV status rather than to
any physical risks connected with blood testing. Some
93

AIDS tests

Another test, called the VScan test kit, requires no
refrigeration or electricity and can safely be stored at
room temperature. Even if the positive results must be
confirmed by ELISA or Western blotting, an accurate
initial rapid test can help screen populations for HIV
antibodies.

Alanine aminotransferase test

patients are better prepared to cope with a positive
diagnosis than others, depending on their age, sex,
health, resources, belief system, and similar factors.

Weinhardt, Lance S., et al. ‘‘Human Immunodeficiency
Virus Testing and Behavior Change.’’ Archives of
Internal Medicine (May 22, 2000): 1538.

Ken R. Wells
Teresa G. Odle

Normal results
Normal results for ELISA, Western blot, IFA,
and PCR testing are negative for HIV antibody.
Normal results for blood cell counts:


WBC differential: Total lymphocytes 24-44% of the
white blood cells.



Hematocrit: 40-54% in men; 37-47% in women.

T cell lymphocytes: 644-2200/mm3, 60-88% of all
lymphocytes.



B cell lymphocytes: 82-392/mm3, 3-20% of all
lymphocytes.



CD4+ lymphocytes: 500-1200/mm3, 34-67% of all
lymphocytes.


Air embolism see Gas embolism

I Alanine aminotransferase test
Definition
The alanine aminotransferase test, also known as
ALT, is one of a group of tests known as liver function
tests (or LFTs) and is used to monitor damage to the
liver.

Purpose
Abnormal results
The following results in AIDS tests indicate progression of the disease:


Percentage of CD4+ lymphocytes: less than 20% of
all lymphocytes.



CD4+ lymphocyte count: less than 200 cells/mm3.



Viral load test: Levels more than 5000 copies/mL.



:-2-microglobulin: Levels more than 3.5 mg/dL.



P24 antigen: Measurable amounts in blood serum.

Resources
BOOKS

Bennett, Rebecca, and Erin, Charles A., editors. HIV and
AIDS Testing, Screening, and Confidentiality: Ethics,
Law, and Social Policy. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press, 2001.
PERIODICALS

‘‘Finger-stick Test is Accurate and Acceptable to Women in
Thailand.’’ Drug Week (September 5, 2003): 168.
Kaplan, Edward H., and Glen A. Satten. ‘‘Repeat Screening
for HIV: When to Test and Why.’’ The Journal of the
American Medical Association.
Medical Devices & Surgical Technology Week (September
12, 2004): 102.
‘‘Researcher Developing Home Test Kit for HIV
Therapies.’’ Medical Devices & Surgical Technology
Week (December 23, 2001): 2.
‘‘Researchers Report New Ultra-sensitive AIDS Test.’’
Biotech Week (July 14, 2004): 246.
94

ALT levels are used to detect liver abnormalities.
Since the alanine aminotransferase enzyme is also
found in muscle, tests indicating elevated AST levels
might also indicate muscle damage. However, other
tests, such as the levels of the MB fraction of creatine
kinase should indicate whether the abnormal test
levels are because of muscle or liver damage.

Description
The alanine aminotransferase test (ALT) can
reveal liver damage. It is probably the most specific
test for liver damage. However, the severity of the liver
damage is not necessarily shown by the ALT test, since
the amount of dead liver tissue does not correspond to
higher ALT levels. Also, patients with normal, or
declining, ALT levels may experience serious liver
damage without an increase in ALT.
Nevertheless, ALT is widely used, and useful,
because ALT levels are elevated in most patients with
liver disease. Although ALT levels do not necessarily
indicate the severity of the damage to the liver, they
may indicate how much of the liver has been damaged.
ALT levels, when compared to the levels of a similar
enzyme, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), may provide important clues to the nature of the liver disease.
For example, within a certain range of values, a ratio
of 2:1 or greater for AST: ALT might indicate that a
patient suffers from alcoholic liver disease. Other diagnostic data may be gleaned from ALT tests to indicate
abnormal results.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Description

No special preparations are necessary for this test.

Aftercare
This test involves blood being drawn, probably
from a vein in the patient’s elbow. The patient should
keep the wound from the needle puncture covered
(with a bandage) until the bleeding stops. Patients
should report any unusual symptoms to their
physician.

Normal results
Normal values vary from laboratory to laboratory, and should be available to your physician at the
time of the test. An informal survey of some laboratories indicates many laboratories find values from
approximately seven to 50 IU/L to be normal.

Abnormal results
Low levels of ALT (generally below 300 IU/L)
may indicate any kind of liver disease. Levels above
1,000 IU/L generally indicate extensive liver damage
from toxins or drugs, viral hepatitis, or a lack of oxygen (usually resulting from very low blood pressure or
a heart attack). A briefly elevated ALT above 1,000
IU/L that resolves in 24-48 hours may indicate a
blockage of the bile duct. More moderate levels of
ALT (300-1,000IU/L) may support a diagnosis of
acute or chronic hepatitis.
It is important to note that persons with normal
livers may have slightly elevated levels of ALT. This is
a normal finding.
Michael V. Zuck, PhD

Albers-Schönberg disease see Osteopetroses

I Albinism
Definition
Albinism is an inherited condition present at
birth, characterized by a lack of pigment that normally
gives color to the skin, hair, and eyes. Many types of
albinism exist, all of which involve lack of pigment in
varying degrees. The condition, which is found in all
races, may be accompanied by eye problems and may
lead to skin cancer later in life.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Albinism is a rare disorder found in fewer than
five people per 100,000 in the United States and
Europe. Other parts of the world have a much higher
rate; for example, albinism is found in about 20 out of
every 100,000 people in southern Nigeria.
There are 10 types of the most common form of the
condition, known as ‘‘oculocutaneous albinism,’’ which
affects the eyes, hair, and skin. In its most severe form,
hair and skin remain pure white throughout life. People
with a less severe form are born with white hair and skin,
which turn slightly darker as they age. Everyone with
oculocutaneous albinism experiences abnormal flickering eye movements (nystagmus) and sensitivity to bright
light. There may be other eye problems as well, including poor vision and crossed or ‘‘lazy’’ eyes (strabismus).
The second most common type of the condition is
known as ‘‘ocular’’ albinism, in which only the eyes
lack color; skin and hair are normal. There are five
forms of ocular albinism; some types cause more problems–especially eye problems–than others.

Causes and symptoms
Every cell in the body contains a matched pair of
genes, one inherited from each parent. These genes act
as a sort of ‘‘blueprint’’ that guides the development of
a fetus.
Albinism is an inherited problem caused by a flaw
in one or more of the genes that are responsible for
directing the eyes and skin to make melanin (pigment).
As a result, little or no pigment is made, and the child’s
skin, eyes and hair may be colorless.
In most types of albinism, a recessive trait, the
child inherits flawed genes for making melanin from
both parents. Because the task of making melanin is
complex, there are many different types of albinism,
involving a number of different genes.
It’s also possible to inherit one normal gene and
one albinism gene. In this case, the one normal gene
provides enough information in its cellular blueprint
to make some pigment, and the child will have normal
skin and eye color. They ‘‘carry’’ one gene for albinism. About one in 70 people are albinism carriers, with
one flawed gene but no symptoms; they have a 50%
chance of passing the albinism gene to their child.
However, if both parents are carriers with one flawed
gene each, they have a 1 in 4 chance of passing on both
copies of the flawed gene to the child, who will have
albinism. (There is also a type of ocular albinism that
is carried on the X chromosome and occurs almost
exclusively in males because they have only one X
95

Albinism

Preparation

Albinism
A man with albinism stands with his normally pigmented father. (Photograph by Norman Lightfoot, Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)

chromosome and, therefore, no other gene for the trait
to override the flawed one.)
Symptoms of albinism can involve the skin, hair,
and eyes. The skin, because it contains little pigment,
appears very light, as does the hair.
Although people with albinism may experience a
variety of eye problems, one of the myths about albinism is that it causes people to have pink or red eyes. In
fact, people with albinism can have irises varying from
light gray or blue to brown. (The iris is the colored
portion of the eye that controls the size of the pupil,
the opening that lets light into the eye.) If people with
albinism seem to have reddish eyes, it’s because light is
being reflected from the back of the eye (retina) in
much the same way as happens when people are
photographed with an electronic flash.
People with albinism may have one or more of the
following eye problems:
96



They may be very far-sighted or near-sighted, and
may have other defects in the curvature of the lens of
the eye (astigmatism) that cause images to appear
unfocused.



They may have a constant, involuntary movement of
the eyeball called nystagmus.



They may have problems in coordinating the eyes in
fixing and tracking objects (strabismus), which may
lead to an appearance of having ‘‘crossed eyes’’ at
times. Strabismus may cause some problems with
depth perception, especially at close distances.



They may be very sensitive to light (photophobia)
because their irises allow ‘‘stray’’ light to enter their
eyes. It’s a common misconception that people with
albinism shouldn’t go out on sunny days, but wearing sunglasses can make it possible to go outside
quite comfortably.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Amino acids—Natural substances that are the
building blocks of protein. The body breaks down
the protein in food into amino acids, and then uses
these amino acids to create other proteins. The body
also changes amino acids into melanin pigment.
Astigmatism—An eye condition in which the lens
doesn’t focus light evenly on the retina, leading to
problems with visual sharpness.
Carrier—A person with one normal gene and one
faulty gene, who can pass on a condition to others
without actually having symptoms.
DNA—The abbreviation for ‘‘deoxyribonucleic
acid,’’ the primary carrier of genetic information
found in the chromosomes of almost all organisms. The entwined double structure allows the
chromosomes to be copied exactly during cell
division.
DOPA—The common name for a natural chemical
(3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) made by the body
during the process of making melanin.
Enzyme—A protein that helps the body convert
one chemical substance to another.
Gene—The basic unit of genetic material carried in
a particular place on a chromosome. Genes are
passed on from parents to child when the sperm
and egg unite during conception.
Hairbulb—The root of a strand of hair from which
the color develops.
Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)—A rare type
of albinism characterized by a problem with blood
clotting and a buildup of waxy material in lungs
and intestines.
Melanin—Pigment made in the hair, skin and eyes.
Nystagmus—An involuntary back-and-forth movement of the eyes that is often found in albinism.
Strabismus—Crossed or ‘‘lazy’’ eyes, often found
in albinism.
Tyrosine—A protein building block found in a
wide variety of foods that is used by the body to
make melanin.
Tyrosinase—An enzyme in a pigment cell which
helps change tyrosine to DOPA during the process
of making melanin.

In addition to the characteristically light skin and
eye problems, people with a rare form of albinism
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

called Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) also
have a greater tendency to have bleeding disorders,
inflammation of the large bowel (colitis), lung (pulmonary) disease, and kidney (renal) problems.

Diagnosis
It’s not always easy to diagnose the exact type
of albinism a person has; there are two tests available that can identify only two types of the condition. Recently, a blood test has been developed that
can identify carriers of the gene for some types of
albinism; a similar test during amniocentesis can
diagnose some types of albinism in an unborn
child. A chorionic villus sampling test during the fifth
week of pregnancy may also reveal some types of
albinism.
The specific type of albinism a person has can be
determined by taking a good family history and examining the patient and several close relatives.
The ‘‘hairbulb pigmentation test’’ is used to identify carriers by incubating a piece of the person’s hair
in a solution of tyrosine, a substance in food which the
body uses to make melanin. If the hair turns dark, it
means the hair is making melanin (a ‘‘positive’’ test);
light hair means there is no melanin. This test is the
source of the names of two types of albinism: ‘‘ty-pos’’
and ‘‘ty-neg.’’
The tyrosinase test is more precise than the
hairbulb pigmentation test. It measures the rate at
which hair converts tyrosine into another chemical
(DOPA), which is then made into pigment. The hair
converts tyrosine with the help of a substance called
‘‘tyrosinase.’’ In some types of albinism, tyrosinase
doesn’t do its job, and melanin production breaks
down.

Treatment
There is no treatment that can replace the lack of
melanin that causes the symptoms of albinism.
Doctors can only treat, not cure, the eye problems
that often accompany the lack of skin color. Glasses
are usually needed and can be tinted to ease pain from
too much sunlight. There is no cure for involuntary
eye movements (nystagmus), and treatments for
focusing problems (surgery or contact lenses) are not
effective in all cases.
Crossed eyes (strabismus) can be treated during
infancy, using eye patches, surgery or medicine injections. Treatment may improve the appearance of the
eye, but it can do nothing to cure the underlying
condition.
97

Albinism

KEY TERMS

Alcohol-related neurologic disease

Patients with albinism should avoid excessive
exposure to the sun, especially between 10 a.m. and
2 p.m. If exposure can’t be avoided, they should use
UVA-UVB sunblocks with an SPF of at least 20.
Taking beta- carotene may help provide some skin
color, although it doesn’t protect against sun
exposure.

Prognosis
In the United States, people with this condition
can expect to have a normal lifespan. People with
albinism may experience some social problems
because of a lack of understanding on the part of
others. When a member of a normally dark-skinned
ethnic group has albinism, he or she may face some
very complex social challenges.
One of the greatest health hazards for people with
albinism is excessive exposure to sun without protection, which could lead to skin cancer. Wearing opaque
clothes and sunscreen rated SPF 20, people with albinism can safely work and play outdoors safely even
during the summer.

I Alcohol-related
neurologic
disease
Definition
Alcohol, or ethanol, is a poison with direct toxic
effects on nerve and muscle cells. Depending on
which nerve and muscle pathways are involved,
alcohol can have far-reaching effects on different
parts of the brain, peripheral nerves, and muscles,
with symptoms of memory loss, incoordination,
seizures, weakness, and sensory deficits. These different effects can be grouped into three main categories:
(1) intoxication due to the acute effects of ethanol, (2)
withdrawal syndrome from suddenly stopping drinking, and (3) disorders related to long-term or chronic
alcohol abuse. Alcohol-related neurologic disease
includes Wernicke-Korsakoff disease, alcoholic
cerebellar degeneration, alcoholic myopathy, alcoholic neuropathy, alcohol withdrawal syndrome
with seizures and delirium tremens, and fetal alcohol
syndrome.

Description
Prevention
Genetic counseling is very important to prevent
further occurrences of the conditon.
Resources
BOOKS

National Association for the Visually Handicapped. Larry:
A Book for Children with Albinism Going to School. New
York: National Association for the Visually
Handicapped.
ORGANIZATIONS

Albinism World Alliance. <http://www.albinism.org/awa.
html>.
American Foundation for the Blind. 15 W. 16th St., New
York, NY 10011. (800) AFB-LIND.
Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome Network, Inc. One South
Road, Oyster Bay, NY 11771-1905. (800) 789-9477.
<appell@theonramp.net>.
National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation
(NOAH). 1530 Locust St., #29, Philadelphia, PA 191024415. (800) 473-2310. <http://www.albinism.org>.

Carol A. Turkington

Acute excess intake of alcohol can cause drunkenness (intoxication) or even death, and chronic or longterm abuse leads to potentially irreversible damage to
virtually any level of the nervous system. Any given
patient with long-term alcohol abuse may have no
neurologic complications, a single alcohol-related disease, or multiple conditions, depending on the genes
they have inherited, how well nourished they are, and
other environmental factors, such as exposure to other
drugs or toxins.
Neurologic complications of alcohol abuse may also
result from nutritional deficiency, because alcoholics tend
to eat poorly and may become depleted of thiamine or
other vitamins important for nervous system function.
Persons who are intoxicated are also at higher risk for
head injury or for compression injuries of the peripheral
nerves. Sudden changes in blood chemistry, especially
sodium, related to alcohol abuse may cause central pontine myelinolysis, a condition of the brainstem in which
nerves lose their myelin coating. Liver disease complicating alcoholic cirrhosis may cause dementia, delirium, and
movement disorder.

Causes and symptoms

Albuterol see Bronchodilators
Alcohol abuse see Alcoholism
Alcohol dependence see Alcoholism
98

When a person drinks alcohol, it is absorbed by
blood vessels in the stomach lining and flows rapidly
throughout the body and brain, as ethanol freely
crosses the blood-brain barrier that ordinarily keeps
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Abstinence—Refraining from the use of alcoholic
beverages.
Atrophy—A wasting or decrease in size of a muscle
or other tissue.
Cerebellum—The part of the brain involved in
coordination of movement, walking, and balance.
Degeneration—Gradual, progressive loss of nerve
cells.
Delirium—Sudden confusion with decreased or
fluctuating level of consciousness.
Delirium tremens— A complication that may
accompany alcohol withdrawal. The symptoms
include body shaking (tremulousness), insomnia,
agitation, confusion, hearing voices or seeing
images that are not really there (hallucinations),
seizures, rapid heart beat, profuse sweating, high
blood pressure, and fever.
Dementia—Loss of memory and other higher functions, such as thinking or speech, lasting six months
or more.
Myoglobinuria—Reddish urine caused by excretion of myoglobin, a breakdown product of muscle.
Myopathy—A disorder that causes weakening of
muscles.
Neuropathy—A condition affecting the nerves supplying the arms and legs. Typically, the feet and
hands are involved first. If sensory nerves are
involved, numbness, tingling, and pain are prominent, and if motor nerves are involved, the patient
experiences weakness.
Thiamine—A B vitamin essential for the body to
process carbohydrates and fats. Alcoholics may
suffer complications (including Wernike-Korsakoff
syndrome) from a deficiency of this vitamin.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome—A combination of
symptoms, including eye-movement problems, tremors, and confusion, that is caused by a lack of the
B vitamin thiamine and may be seen in alcoholics.

large molecules from escaping from the blood vessel to
the brain tissue. Drunkenness, or intoxication, may
occur at blood ethanol concentrations of as low as
50-150 mg per dL in people who don’t drink.
Sleepiness, stupor, coma, or even death from respiratory depression and low blood pressure occur at
progressively higher concentrations.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Although alcohol is broken down by the liver,
the toxic effects from a high dose of alcohol are most
likely a direct result of alcohol itself rather than of its
breakdown products. The fatal dose varies widely
because people who drink heavily develop a tolerance to the effects of alcohol with repeated use. In
addition, alcohol tolerance results in the need for
higher levels of blood alcohol to achieve intoxicating
effects, which increases the likelihood that habitual
drinkers will be exposed to high and potentially toxic
levels of ethanol. This is particularly true when binge
drinkers fail to eat, because fasting decreases the rate
of alcohol clearance and causes even higher blood
alcohol levels.
When a chronic alcoholic suddenly stops drinking, withdrawal of alcohol leads to a syndrome of
increased excitability of the central nervous system,
called delirium tremens or ‘‘DTs.’’ Symptoms begin
six to eight hours after abstinence, and are most pronounced 24-72 hours after abstinence. They include
body shaking (tremulousness), insomnia, agitation,
confusion, hearing voices or seeing images that are
not really there (such as crawling bugs), seizures,
rapid heart beat, profuse sweating, high blood pressure, and fever. Alcohol-related seizures may also
occur without withdrawal, such as during active
heavy drinking or after more than a week without
alcohol.
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is caused by
deficiency of the B-vitamin thiamine, and can also
be seen in people who don’t drink but have some
other cause of thiamine deficiency, such as chronic
vomiting that prevents the absorption of this vitamin.
A 2004 study demonstrated that alcohol-dependent
patients admitted to a detoxification facility had consumed significantly less thiamine than a comparison
group of healthy volunteers. Patients with this condition have the sudden onset of Wernicke encephalopathy; the symptoms include marked confusion,
delirium, disorientation, inattention, memory loss,
and drowsiness. Examination reveals abnormalities
of eye movement, including jerking of the eyes
(nystagmus) and double vision. Problems with balance make walking difficult. People may have trouble
coordinating their leg movements, but usually not
their arms. If thiamine is not given promptly,
Wernicke encephalopathy may progress to stupor,
coma, and death.
If thiamine is given and death averted, Korsakoff’s
syndrome may develop in some patients, who suffer
from memory impairment that leaves them unable to
remember events for a period of a few years before the
onset of illness (retrograde amnesia) and unable to
99

Alcohol-related neurologic disease

KEY TERMS

Alcohol-related neurologic disease

learn new information (anterograde amnesia). Most
patients have very limited insight into their memory
dysfunction and have a tendency to make up explanations for events they have forgotten (confabulation).
Severe alcoholism can cause cerebellar degeneration, a slowly progressive condition affecting portions
of the brain called the anterior and superior cerebellar
vermis, causing a wide-based gait, leg incoordination,
and an inability to walk heel-to-toe in tightrope fashion. The gait disturbance usually develops over several
weeks, but may be relatively mild for some time, and
then suddenly worsen after binge drinking or an unrelated illness.
Fetal alcohol syndrome occurs in infants born to
alcoholic mothers when prenatal exposure to ethanol
retards fetal growth and development. Affected
infants often have a distinctive appearance with a
thin upper lip, flat nose and mid-face, short stature
and small head size. Almost half are mentally
retarded, and most others are mildly impaired intellectually or have problems with speech, learning, and
behavior. Fetal alcohol syndrome is the leading cause
of mental retardation and many physicians warn that
there is no safe level of alcohol for a pregnant mother
to consume.
Alcoholic myopathy, or weakness secondary to
breakdown of muscle tissue, is also known as alcoholic
rhabdomyolysis or alcoholic myoglobinuria. Males
are affected by acute (sudden onset) alcoholic myopathy four times as often as females. Breakdown of
muscle tissue (myonecrosis), can come on suddenly
during binge drinking or in the first days of alcohol
withdrawal. In its mildest form, this breakdown may
cause no noticeable symptoms, but may be detected by
a temporary elevation in blood levels of an enzyme
found predominantly in muscle, the MM fraction of
creatine kinase.
The severe form of acute alcoholic myopathy is
associated with the sudden onset of muscle pain, swelling, and weakness; a reddish tinge in the urine caused
by myoglobin, a breakdown product of muscle
excreted in the urine; and a rapid rise in muscle
enzymes in the blood. Symptoms usually worsen over
hours to a few days, and then improve over the next
week to 10 days as the patient is withdrawn from
alcohol. Muscle symptoms are usually generalized,
but pain and swelling may selectively involve the
calves or other muscle groups. The muscle breakdown
of acute alcoholic myopathy may be worsened by
crush injuries, which may occur when people drink
so much that they compress a muscle group with
their body weight for a long time without moving, or
100

by withdrawal seizures with generalized muscle
activity.
In patients who abuse alcohol over many years,
chronic alcoholic myopathy may develop. Males and
females are equally affected. Symptoms include painless weakness of the limb muscles closest to the trunk
and the girdle muscles, including the thighs, hips,
shoulders, and upper arms. This weakness develops
gradually, over weeks or months, without symptoms
of acute muscle injury. Muscle atrophy, or decreased
bulk, may be striking. The nerves of the extremities
may also begin to break down, a condition known as
alcoholic peripheral neuropathy, which can add to the
person’s difficulty in moving.
The way in which alcohol destroys muscle tissue is
still not well understood. Proposed mechanisms
include muscle membrane changes affecting the transport of calcium, potassium, or other minerals;
impaired muscle energy metabolism; and impaired
protein synthesis. Alcohol is metabolized or broken
down primarily by the liver, with a series of chemical
reactions in which ethanol is converted to acetate.
Acetate is metabolized by skeletal muscle, and alcohol-related changes in liver function may affect skeletal muscle metabolism, decreasing the amount of
blood sugar available to muscles during prolonged
activity. Because not enough sugar is available to supply needed energy, muscle protein may be broken
down as an alternate energy source. However, toxic
effects on muscle may be a direct result of alcohol itself
rather than of its breakdown products.
Although alcoholic peripheral neuropathy may
contribute to muscle weakness and atrophy by injuring the motor nerves controlling muscle movement,
alcoholic neuropathy more commonly affects sensory
fibers. Injury to these fibers can cause tingling or burning pain in the feet, which may be severe enough to
interfere with walking. As the condition worsens, pain
decreases but numbness increases.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of alcohol-related neurologic disease depends largely on finding characteristic symptoms and signs in patients who abuse alcohol. Other
possible causes should be excluded by the appropriate
tests, which may include blood chemistry, thyroid
function tests, brain MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or CT (computed tomography scan), and/or
cerebrospinal fluid analysis.
Acute alcoholic myopathy can be diagnosed
by finding myoglobin in the urine and increased
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment
Acute management of alcohol intoxication, delirium tremens, and withdrawal is primarily supportive,
to monitor and treat any cardiovascular or respiratory
failure that may develop. In delirium tremens, fever
and sweating may necessitate treatment of fluid loss
and secondary low blood pressure. Agitation may be
treated with benzodiazepines such as chlordiazepoxide,
beta-adrenergic antagonists such as atenolol, or alpha
2-adrenergic agonists such as clonidine. Because
Wernicke’s syndrome is rapidly reversible with thiamine, and because death may intervene if thiamine is
not given promptly, all patients admitted for acute
complications of alcohol, as well as all patients with
unexplained encephalopathy, should be given intravenous thiamine.
Withdrawal seizures typically resolve without
specific anti-epileptic drug treatment, although status
epilepticus (continual seizures occurring without interruption) should be treated vigorously. Acute alcoholic
myopathy with myoglobinuria requires monitoring
and maintenance of kidney function, and correction
of imbalances in blood chemistry including potassium,
phosphate, and magnesium levels.
Chronic alcoholic myopathy and other chronic
conditions are treated by correcting associated nutritional deficiencies and maintaining a diet adequate in
protein and carbohydrate. The key to treating any
alcohol-related disease is helping the patient overcome
alcohol addiction. Behavioral measures and social supports may be needed in patients who develop broad
problems in their thinking abilities (dementia) or
remain in a state of confusion and disorientation
(delirium). People with walking disturbances may
benefit from physical therapy and assistive devices.
Doctors may also prescribe drugs to treat the pain
associated with peripheral neuropathy.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Prognosis
Complete recovery from Wernicke’s syndrome
may follow prompt administration of thiamine.
However, repeated episodes of encephalopathy or
prolonged alcohol abuse may cause persistent dementia or Korsakoff psychosis. Most patients recover fully
from acute alcoholic myopathy within days to weeks,
but severe cases may be fatal from acute kidney failure
and disturbances in heart rhythm secondary to
increased potassium levels. Recovery from chronic
alcoholic myopathy may occur over weeks to months
of abstinence from alcohol and correction of malnutrition. Cerebellar degeneration and alcoholic neuropathy may also improve to some extent with abstinence
and balanced diet, depending on the severity and duration of the condition.

Prevention
Prevention requires abstinence from alcohol.
Persons who consume small or moderate amounts of
alcohol might theoretically help prevent nutritional
complications of alcohol use with dietary supplements
including B vitamins. However, proper nutrition cannot protect against the direct toxic effect of alcohol or
of its breakdown products. Patients with any alcoholrelated symptoms or conditions, pregnant women,
and patients with liver or neurologic disease should
abstain completely. Persons with family history of
alcoholism or alcohol-related conditions may also be
at increased risk for neurologic complications of alcohol use.
Resources
PERIODICALS

‘‘Missouri Clinics Will Diagnose and Treat Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome.’’ Mental Health Weekly Digeste (June 7,
2004): 33.
Stacey, Philip S. ‘‘Preliminary Investigation of Thiamine and
Alcohol Intake in Clinical and Healthy Samples.’’
Psychological Reports (June 2004): 845–849.
ORGANIZATIONS

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 6000
Executive Boulevard, Willco Building, Bethesda, MD
20892-7003. <http://silk.nih.gov/silk/niaaa1>.

Laurie Barclay, MD
Teresa G. Odle

Alcohol withdrawal see Withdrawal
syndromes
Alcoholic cerebellar disease see Alcoholrelated neurologic disease
101

Alcohol-related neurologic disease

creatine kinase and other blood enzymes released from
injured muscle. The surgical removal of a small piece
of muscle for microscopic analysis (muscle biopsy)
shows the scattered breakdown and repair of muscle
fibers. Doctors must rule out other acquired causes of
muscle breakdown, which include the abuse of drugs
such as heroin, cocaine, or amphetamines; trauma
with crush injury; the depletion of phosphate or potassium; or an underlying defect in the metabolism of
carbohydrates or lipids. In chronic alcoholic myopathy, serum creatine kinase often is normal, and muscle
biopsy shows atrophy, or loss of muscle fibers.
Electromyography (EMG) may show features characteristic of alcoholic myopathy or neuropathy.

Alcoholism

Alcoholic hepatitis see Hepatitis, alcoholic
Alcoholic rose gardener’s disease see
Sporotrichosis

I Alcoholism

Symptoms Of Co-Alcohol Dependence

Psychological distress manifested in symptoms such as anxiety, aggression,
anorexia nervosa, bulimia, depression, insomnia, hyperactivity, and suicidal
tendency
Psychosomatic illness (ailments that have no biological basis and clear up
after the co-alcoholism clears up)
Family violence or neglect
Alcoholism or other drug abuse

Definition
Alcoholism is the popular term for alcohol abuse
and alcohol dependence. These disorders involve
repeated life problems that can be directly attributed
to the use of alcohol. Both disorders can have serious
consequences, affecting an individual’s health and personal life, as well as having an impact on society at large.

Description
The effects of alcoholism are far reaching.
Alcohol affects every body system, causing a wide
range of health problems. Problems include poor
nutrition, memory disorders, difficulty with balance
and walking, liver disease (including cirrhosis and
hepatitis), high blood pressure, muscle weakness
(including the heart), heart rhythm disturbances,
anemia, clotting disorders, decreased immunity to
infections, gastrointestinal inflammation and irritation, acute and chronic problems with the pancreas,
low blood sugar, high blood fat content, interference
with reproductive fertility, and weakened bones.
On a personal level, alcoholism results in marital
and other relationship difficulties, depression, unemployment, child abuse, and general family dysfunction.
Alcoholism causes or contributes to a variety of
severe social problems including homelessness, murder, suicide, injury, and violent crime. Alcohol is a
contributing factor in at least 50% of all deaths from
motor vehicle accidents. In fact, about 100,000 deaths
occur each year due to the effects of alcohol, of which
50% are due to injuries of some sort. According to a
special report prepared for the U.S. Congress by the
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,
the impact of alcohol on society, including violence,
traffic accidents, lost work productivity, and premature death, costs our nation an estimated $185 billion
annually. In addition, it is estimated that approximately one in four children (19 million children or
29% of children up to 17 years of age) is exposed at
some time to familial alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, or both. Furthermore, it has been estimated
that approximately 18% of adults experience an
102

episode of alcohol abuse or dependence a some time
during their lives.

Causes and symptoms
There are probably a number of factors that work
together to cause a person to become an alcoholic.
Recent genetic studies have demonstrated that close
relatives of an alcoholic are four times more likely to
become alcoholics themselves. Furthermore, this risk
holds true even for children who were adopted away
from their biological families at birth and raised in a
non-alcoholic adoptive family, with no knowledge of
their biological family’s difficulties with alcohol. More
research is being conducted to determine if genetic
factors could account for differences in alcohol metabolism that may increase the risk of an individual
becoming an alcoholic.
The symptoms of alcoholism can be broken down
into two major categories: symptoms of acute alcohol
use and symptoms of long-term alcohol use.
Immediate (acute) effects of alcohol use
Alcohol exerts a depressive effect on the brain. The
blood-brain barrier does not prevent alcohol from
entering the brain, so the brain alcohol level will quickly
become equivalent to the blood alcohol level. Alcohol’s
depressive effects result in difficulty walking, poor balance, slurring of speech, and generally poor coordination (accounting in part for the increased likelihood of
injury). The affected person also may have impairment
of peripheral vision. At higher alcohol levels, a person’s
breathing and heart rates will be slowed, and vomiting
may occur (with a high risk of the vomit being breathed
into the lungs, resulting in severe problems, including
the possibility of pneumonia). Still higher alcohol levels
may result in coma and death.
Effects of long-term (chronic) alcoholism
Long-term use of alcohol affects virtually every
organ system of the body:
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Blood-brain barrier— A network of blood vessels
characterized by closely spaced cells that prevents
many potentially toxic substances from penetrating
the blood vessel walls to enter the brain. Alcohol is
able to cross this barrier.
Detoxification—The phase of treatment during
which a patient stops drinking and is monitored
and cared for while he or she experiences withdrawal from alcohol.
Relapse—A return to a disease state, after recovery
appeared to be occurring. In alcoholism, relapse
refers to a patient beginning to drink alcohol again
after a period of avoiding alcohol.
Tolerance—A phenomenon during which a drinker becomes physically accustomed to a particular
quantity of alcohol, and requires ever-increasing
quantities in order to obtain the same effects.



Blood. Alcohol can cause changes to all the types of
blood cells. Red blood cells become abnormally
large. White blood cells (important for fighting infections) decrease in number, resulting in a weakened
immune system. This places alcoholics at increased
risk for infections, and is thought to account in part
for the increased risk of cancer faced by alcoholics
(10 times the risk for nonalcoholics). Platelets and
blood clotting factors are affected, causing an
increased risk of bleeding.



Heart. Small amounts of alcohol cause a drop in
blood pressure, but with increased use, alcohol
begins to increase blood pressure into a dangerous
range. High levels of fats circulating in the bloodstream increase the risk of heart disease. Heavy
drinking results in an increase in heart size, weakening of the heart muscle, abnormal heart rhythms, a
risk of blood clots forming within the chambers of the
heart, and a greatly increased risk of stroke (due to a
blood clot from the heart entering the circulatory
system, going to the brain, and blocking a brain
blood vessel).



Reproductive system. Heavy drinking has a negative
effect on fertility in both men and women, by
decreasing testicle and ovary size, and interfering
with both sperm and egg production. When pregnancy is achieved in an alcoholic woman, the baby
has a great risk of being born with fetal alcohol
syndrome, which causes distinctive facial defects,
lowered IQ, and behavioral problems.

Withdrawal—Those signs and symptoms experienced by a person who has become physically
dependent on a drug, experienced upon decreasing
the drug’s dosage or discontinuing its use.





Nervous system. An estimated 30-40% of all men in
their teens and twenties have experienced alcoholic
blackout, which occurs when drinking a large quantity of alcohol results in the loss of memory of the
time surrounding the episode of drinking. Alcohol is
well-known to cause sleep disturbances, so that overall sleep quality is affected. Numbness and tingling
may occur in the arms and legs. Two syndromes,
which can occur together or separately, are known
as Wernicke’s and Korsakoff’s syndromes. Both are
due to the low thiamine (a form of vitamin B
complex) levels found in alcoholics. Wernicke’s
syndrome results in disordered eye movements, very
poor balance and difficulty walking, while
Korsakoff’s syndrome severely affects one’s memory,
preventing new learning from taking place.
Gastrointestinal system. Alcohol causes loosening of
the muscular ring that prevents the stomach’s contents from re-entering the esophagus. Therefore, the
acid from the stomach flows backward into the esophagus, burning those tissues, and causing pain and
bleeding. Inflammation of the stomach also can
result in bleeding and pain, and decreased desire to
eat. A major cause of severe, uncontrollable bleeding
(hemorrhage) in an alcoholic is the development
of enlarged (dilated) blood vessels within the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Diagnosis
Two different types of alcohol-related difficulties
have been identified. The first is called alcohol dependence, which refers to a person who literally depends
103

Alcoholism

esophagus, which are called esophageal varices.
These varices actually are developed in response to
liver disease, and are extremely prone to bursting and
hemorrhaging. Diarrhea is a common symptom, due
to alcohol’s effect on the pancreas. In addition,
inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) is a serious and painful problem in alcoholics. Throughout
the intestinal tract, alcohol interferes with the
absorption of nutrients, creating a malnourished
state. Because alcohol is broken down (metabolized)
within the liver, the organ is severely affected by
constant levels of alcohol. Alcohol interferes with a
number of important chemical processes that also
occur in the liver. The liver begins to enlarge and fill
with fat (fatty liver), fibrous scar tissue interferes with
the liver’s normal structure and function (cirrhosis),
and the liver may become inflamed (hepatitis).

KEY TERMS

Alcoholism

on the use of alcohol. Three of the following traits
must be present to diagnose alcohol dependence:


tolerance, meaning that a person becomes accustomed to a particular dose of alcohol, and must
increase the dose in order to obtain the desired effect



withdrawal, meaning that a person experiences
unpleasant physical and psychological symptoms
when he or she does not drink alcohol



the tendency to drink more alcohol than one intends
(once an alcoholic starts to drink, he or she finds it
difficult to stop)



being unable to avoid drinking or stop drinking once
started



having large blocks of time taken up by alcohol use



choosing to drink at the expense of other important
tasks or activities



drinking despite evidence of negative effects on one’s
health, relationships, education, or job

Diagnosis is sometimes brought about when
family members call an alcoholic’s difficulties to the
attention of a physician. A clinician may begin to be
suspicious when a patient suffers repeated injuries or
begins to experience medical problems related to
the use of alcohol. In fact, some estimates suggest
that about 20% of a physician’s patients will be
alcoholics.
Diagnosis is aided by administering specific psychological assessments that try to determine what
aspects of a person’s life may be affected by his or
her use of alcohol. Determining the exact quantity of
alcohol that a person drinks is of much less importance than determining how his or her drinking affects
relationships, jobs, educational goals, and family life.
In fact, because the metabolism (how the body breaks
down and processes) of alcohol is so individual, the
quantity of alcohol consumed is not part of the criteria
list for diagnosing either alcohol dependence or alcohol abuse.
One simple tool for beginning the diagnosis of
alcoholism is called the CAGE questionnaire. It consists of four questions, with the first letters of each key
word spelling out the word CAGE:


Have you ever tried to Cut down on your drinking?



Have you ever been Annoyed by anyone’s comments
about your drinking?



Have you ever felt Guilty about your drinking?



Do you ever need an Eye-opener (a morning drink of
alcohol) to start the day)?

104

Other, longer lists of questions exist to help determine the severity and effects of a person’s alcohol use.
Given the recent research pointing to a genetic basis
for alcoholism, it is important to ascertain whether
anyone else in the person’s family has ever suffered
from alcoholism.

Treatment
Treatment of alcoholism has two parts. The first
step in the treatment of alcoholism, called detoxification, involves helping the person stop drinking and
ridding his or her body of the harmful (toxic) effects
of alcohol. Because the person’s body has become
accustomed to alcohol, the person will need to be
supported through withdrawal. Withdrawal will be
different for different patients, depending on the severity of the alcoholism, as measured by the quantity of
alcohol ingested daily and the length of time the
patient has been an alcoholic. Withdrawal symptoms
can range from mild to life-threatening. Mild withdrawal symptoms include nausea, achiness, diarrhea,
difficulty sleeping, sweatiness, anxiety, and trembling.
This phase is usually over in about three to five days.
More severe effects of withdrawal can include hallucinations (in which a patient sees, hears, or feels something that is not actually real), seizures, an unbearable
craving for more alcohol, confusion, fever, fast heart
rate, high blood pressure, and delirium (a fluctuating
level of consciousness). Patients at highest risk for the
most severe symptoms of withdrawal (referred to as
delirium tremens) are those with other medical
problems, including malnutrition, liver disease, or
Wernicke’s syndrome. Delirium tremens usually
begin about three to five days after the patient’s last
drink, progressing from the more mild symptoms to
the more severe, and may last a number of days.
Patients going through only mild withdrawal are
simply monitored carefully to make sure that more
severe symptoms do not develop. No medications are
necessary, however. Treatment of a patient suffering
the more severe effects of withdrawal may require the
use of sedative medications to relieve the discomfort of
withdrawal and to avoid the potentially life-threatening complications of high blood pressure, fast heart
rate, and seizures. Drugs called benzodiazapines are
helpful in those patients suffering from hallucinations.
Because of the patient’s nausea, fluids may need to be
given through a vein (intravenously), along with some
necessary sugars and salts. It is crucial that thiamine
be included in the fluids, because thiamine is usually
quite low in alcoholic patients, and deficiency of thiamine is responsible for the Wernicke-Korsakoff
syndrome.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Sessions led by peers, where recovering alcoholics
meet regularly and provide support for each other’s
recoveries, are considered among the best methods of
preventing a return to drinking (relapse). Perhaps the
most well-known such group is called Alcoholics
Anonymous, which uses a ‘‘12-step’’ model to help
people avoid drinking. These steps involve recognizing
the destructive power that alcohol has held over
the alcoholic’s life, looking to a higher power for
help in overcoming the problem, and reflecting on
the ways in which the use of alcohol has hurt others
and, if possible, making amends to those people.
According to a recent study reported by the American
Psychological Association (APA), anyone, regardless
of his or her religious beliefs or lack of religious beliefs,
can benefit from participation in 12-step programs
such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics
Anonymous (NA). The number of visits to 12-step
self-help groups exceeds the number of visits to all
mental health professionals combined.
There are also medications that may help an alcoholic avoid returning to drinking. These have been
used with variable success. Disulfiram (Antabuse)
is a drug which, when mixed with alcohol, causes
unpleasant reactions including nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and trembling. Naltrexone, along with a
similar compound, Nalmefene, can be helpful in limiting the effects of a relapse. Acamprosate is helpful in
preventing relapse. None of these medications would
be helpful unless the patient was also willing to work
very hard to change his or her behavior. In 2004, a new
compound was discovered that blocks actions of
chemicals in the brain that may lead to relapses.
Clinical tests were still underway, but development of
such a drug could have great potential in the medical
management of alcoholism. Another study that year
found that topiramate (Topamax), an antiseizure
medication, was effective in treating alcohol dependence in 150 participants in a clinical trial. The authors
called for further study of this possible treatment.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments can be a helpful adjunct
for the alcoholic patient, once the medical danger of
withdrawal has passed. Because many alcoholics
have very stressful lives (whether because of or leading to the alcoholism is sometimes a matter of
debate), many of the treatments for alcoholism
involve dealing with and relieving stress. These
include massage, meditation, and hypnotherapy. The
malnutrition of long-term alcohol use is addressed by
nutrition-oriented practitioners with careful attention to a healthy diet and the use of nutritional supplements such as vitamins A, B complex, and C, as
well as certain fatty acids, amino acids, zinc, magnesium, and selenium. Herbal treatments include milk
thistle (Silybum marianum), which is thought to protect the liver against damage. Other herbs are thought
to be helpful for the patient suffering through withdrawal. Some of these include lavender (Lavandula
officinalis), skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora), chamomile (Matricaria recutita), peppermint (Mentha
piperita) yarrow (Achillea millefolium), and valerian
(Valeriana officinalis). Acupuncture is believed to
both decrease withdrawal symptoms and to help
improve a patient’s chances for continued recovery
from alcoholism.

Prognosis
Recovery from alcoholism is a life-long process.
In fact, people who have suffered from alcoholism are
encouraged to refer to themselves ever after as ‘‘a
recovering alcoholic,’’ never a recovered alcoholic.
This is because most researchers in the field believe
that since the potential for alcoholism is still part of
the individual’s biological and psychological makeup,
one can never fully recover from alcoholism. The
potential for relapse (returning to illness) is always
there, and must be acknowledged and respected.
Statistics suggest that, among middle-class alcoholics
in stable financial and family situations who have
undergone treatment, 60% or more can be successful
at an attempt to stop drinking for at least a year, and
many for a lifetime.

Prevention
Prevention must begin at a relatively young age
since the first instance of intoxication (drunkenness)
usually occurs during the teenage years. In fact, a 2004
study found that girls experimented with alcohol and
cigarettes at a younger age — 20% by seventh grage —
than boys. It is particularly important that teenagers
who are at high risk for alcoholism—those with a
105

Alcoholism

After cessation of drinking has been accomplished, the next steps involve helping the patient
avoid ever taking another drink. This phase of treatment is referred to as rehabilitation. The best programs
incorporate the family into the therapy, because the
family has undoubtedly been severely affected by the
patient’s drinking. Some therapists believe that family
members, in an effort to deal with their loved one’s
drinking problem, sometimes develop patterns of
behavior that accidentally support or ‘‘enable’’ the
patient’s drinking. This situation is referred to as
‘‘co-dependence,’’ and must be addressed in order to
successfully treat a person’s alcoholism.

Aldolase test

family history of alcoholism, an early or frequent use
of alcohol, a tendency to drink to drunkenness, alcohol use that interferes with school work, a poor family
environment, or a history of domestic violence —
receive education about alcohol and its long-term
effects. How this is best achieved, without irritating
the youngsters and thus losing their attention, is the
subject of continuing debate and study.
Resources
BOOKS

KEY TERMS
Aldolase—An enzyme, found primarily in the muscle, that helps convert sugar into energy.
Enzyme—A substance needed to trigger specific
chemical reactions.
Neurologic—Having to do with the nervous system.
Skeletal muscle—Muscle connected to, and necessary for the movement of, bones.

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 10th
Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcohol and
Health. National Institute of Health, 2000.
PERIODICALS

Koch Kubetin, Sally. ‘‘Girls Before Boys in Cigarette and
Alcohol Use: Longitudinal Study.’’ Pediatric News
(March 2004): 29.
‘‘Research Findings Suggest Compound Might Help in
Fight Against Alcoholism.’’ Drug Week (January 9,
2004): 18.
Walling, Anne D. ‘‘Topiramate in the Treatment of Alcohol
Dependence.’’ American Family Physician (January 1,
2004): 195.
ORGANIZATIONS

Al-Anon, Alanon Family Group, Inc. P.O. Box 862, Midtown
Station, New York, NY 10018-0862. (800) 356-9996.
<http://www.recovery.org/aa>.
Alcoholics Anonymous. Grand Central Station, Box 459,
New York, NY 10163. <http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org/>.
National Alliance on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence,
Inc. 12 West 21st St., New York, NY 10010. (212) 2066770.
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information.
11426 Rockville Pike, Suite 200, Rockville, MD. 20852.
(800) 729-6686. <http:\\www.health.org>.
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA). 6000 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-7003. <http://www.niaaa.nih.gov>.

Bill Asenjo, MS, CRC
Teresa G. Odle

ALD see Adrenoleukodystrophy

I Aldolase test
Definition
Aldolase is an enzyme found throughout the
body, particularly in muscles. Like all enzymes, it is
needed to trigger specific chemical reactions. Aldolase
106

helps muscle turn sugar into energy. Testing for aldolase is done to diagnose and monitor skeletal muscle
diseases.

Purpose
Skeletal muscle diseases increase the aldolase level
found in a person’s blood. Skeletal muscles are those
muscles attached to bones and whose contractions
make those bones move. When the muscles are diseased or damaged, such as in muscular dystrophy, the
cells deteriorate and break open. The contents of the
cells, including aldolase, spill into the bloodstream.
Measuring the amount of aldolase in the blood indicates the degree of muscle damage.
As muscles continue to deteriorate, aldolase levels
decrease and eventually fall below normal. Less muscle means fewer cells and less aldolase.
Muscle weakness may be caused by neurologic as
well as muscular problems. The measurement of
aldolase levels can help pinpoint the cause. Aldolase
levels will be normal where muscle weakness is caused
by neurological disease, such as poliomyelitis or
multiple sclerosis, but aldolase levels will be elevated
in cases of muscular disease, such as muscular
dystrophy.
Aldolase is also found in the liver and cardiac
muscle of the heart. Damage or disease to these
organs, such as chronic hepatitis or a heart attack,
will also increase aldolase levels in the blood, but to a
lesser degree.

Description
Aldolase is measured by mixing a person’s serum
with a substance with which aldolase is known to
trigger a reaction. The end product of this reaction is
measured, and, from that measurement, the amount of
aldolase in the person’s serum is determined.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

I Aldosterone assay
Definition

Preparation
To collect the 5-10 ml of blood needed for this test,
a healthcare worker ties a tourniquet on the patient’s
upper arm, locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and
inserts a needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws
the blood through the needle into an attached tube.
Collection of the sample takes only a few minutes.
The patient should avoid strenuous exercise and
have nothing to eat or drink, except water, for eight to
ten hours before this test.

Aftercare
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
site and the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to
the puncture site until the bleeding stops will reduce
bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site will relieve
discomfort.

Normal results
Newborns have the highest normal aldolase levels
and adults the lowest. Normal values will vary based
on the laboratory and the method used.

Abnormal results
As noted, aldolase is elevated in skeletal muscle
diseases, such as muscular dystrophies. Duchenne’s
muscular dystrophy, the most common type of muscular dystrophy, will increase the aldolase level more
than any other disease.
Nondisease conditions that affect the muscle, such
as injury, gangrene, or an infection, can also increase
the aldolase level. Also, strenuous exercise can temporarily increase a person’s aldolase level.
Certain medications can increase the aldolase
level, while others can decrease it. To interpret what
the results of the aldolase test mean, a physician will
evaluate the result, the person’s clinical symptoms,
and other tests that are more specific for muscle
damage and disease.
Resources
BOOKS

Mayo Medical Laboratories. Interpretive Handbook.
Rochester, MN: Mayo Medical Laboratories, 1997.

Nancy J. Nordenson
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

This test measures the levels of aldosterone, a
hormone produced by the outer part (cortex) of the
two adrenal glands, organs which sit one on top of
each of the kidneys. Aldosterone regulates the
amounts of sodium and potassium in the blood. This
helps maintain water balance and blood volume,
which, in turn, affects blood pressure.

Purpose
Aldosterone measurement is useful in detecting a
condition called aldosteronism, which is caused by
excess secretion of the hormone from the adrenal
glands. There are two types of aldosteronism: primary
and secondary. Primary aldosteronism is most commonly caused by an adrenal tumor, as in Conn’s
syndrome. Idiopathic (of unknown cause) hyperaldosteronism is another type of primary aldosteronism.
Secondary aldosteronism is more common and may
occur with congestive heart failure, cirrhosis with fluid
in the abdominal cavity (ascites), certain kidney diseases, excess potassium, sodium-depleted diet, and
toxemia of pregnancy.
To differentiate primary aldosteronism from secondary aldosteronism, a plasma renin test should be
performed at the same time as the aldosterone assay.
Renin, an enzyme produced in the kidneys, is high in
secondary aldosteronism and low in primary
aldosteronism.

Description
Aldosterone testing can be performed on a blood
sample or on a 24-hour urine specimen. Several factors, including diet, posture (upright or lying down),
and time of day that the sample is obtained can cause
aldosterone levels to fluctuate. Blood samples are
affected by short-term fluctuations. A urine specimen
collected over an entire 24-hour period lessens the
effects of those interfering factors and provides a
more reliable aldosterone measurement.

Preparation
Fasting is not required for either the blood sample
or urine collection, but the patient should maintain a
normal sodium diet (approximately 0.1 oz [3g]/day)
for at least two weeks before either test. The doctor
should decide if drugs that alter sodium, potassium,
and fluid balance (e.g., diuretics, antihypertensives,
107

Aldosterone assay

The test is covered by insurance when medically
necessary. Results are usually available the next day.

Alemtuzumab

Abnormal results

KEY TERMS
Aldosteronism—A condition in which the adrenal
glands secrete excessive levels of the hormone
aldosterone.
Renin—An enzyme produced in the kidneys that
controls the activation of the hormone angiotensin,
which stimulates the adrenal glands to produce
aldosterone.

steroids, oral contraceptives) should be withheld. The
test will be more accurate if these are suspended at
at least two weeks before the test. Renin inhibitors
(e.g., propranolol) should not be taken one week
before the test, unless permitted by the physician.
The patient should avoid licorice for at least two
weeks before the test, because of its aldosterone-like
effect. Strenuous exercise and stress can increase
aldosterone levels as well. Because the test is usually
performed by a method called radioimmunoassay,
recently administered radioactive medications will
affect test results.
Since posture and body position affect aldosterone, hospitalized patients should remain in an
upright position (at least sitting) for two hours
before blood is drawn. Occasionally blood will be
drawn again before the patient gets out of bed.
Nonhospitalized patients should arrive at the laboratory in time to maintain an upright position for at
least two hours.

Risks
Risks for this test are minimal, but may include
slight bleeding from the blood-drawing site, fainting
or feeling lightheaded after venipuncture, or hematoma (blood accumulating under the puncture site).

Normal results
Normal results are laboratory-specific and also
vary with sodium intake, with time of day, source of
specimen (e.g., peripheral vein, adrenal vein, 24-hour
urine), age, sex, and posture.
Reference ranges for blood include:


supine (lying down): 3-10 ng/dL



upright (sitting for at least two hours): Female:
5-30ng/dL; Male: 6-22 ng/dL.
Reference ranges for urine: 2-80 mg/24 hr.

108

Increased levels of aldosterone are found in Conn’s
disease (aldosterone-producing adrenal tumor), and in
cases of Bartter’s syndrome (a condition in which the
kidneys overexcrete potassium, sodium and chloride,
resulting in low blood levels of potassium and high
blood levels of aldosterone and renin). Among other
conditions, elevated levels are also seen in secondary
aldosteronism, stress, and malignant hypertension.
Decreased levels of aldosterone are found in
aldosterone deficiency, steroid therapy, high-sodium
diets, certain antihypertensive therapies, and
Addison’s disease (an autoimmune disorder).
Resources
BOOKS

Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998.

Janis O. Flores

I Alemtuzumab
Definition
Alemtuzumab is sold as Campath in the United
States. Alemtuzumab is a humanized monoclonal
antibody that selectively binds to CD52, a protein
found on the surface of normal and malignant B and
T cells, that is used to reduce the numbers of circulating malignant cells of patients who have B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL).

Purpose
Alemtuzumab is a monoclonal antibody used to
treat B-CLL, one of the most prevalent forms of adult
chronic leukemia. It specifically binds CD52, a protein
found on the surface of essentially all B and T cells of
the immune system. By binding the CD52 protein on
the malignant B cells, the antibody targets it for
removal from the circulation. Scientists believe that
alemtuzumab triggers antibody-mediated lysis of the
B cells, a method that the immune system uses to
eliminate foreign cells.
Alemtuzumab has been approved by the FDA for
treatment of refractory B-CLL. For a patient’s disease
to be classified as refractory, both alkylating agents
and fludarabine treatment must have been tried and
failed. Thus, this drug gives patients who have tried all
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Alkylating agent—A chemical that alters the composition of the genetic material of rapidly dividing cells,
such as cancer cells, causing selective cell death;
used as a chemotherapeutic agent to treat B-CLL.
Antibody—A protective protein made by the
immune system in response to an antigen, also
called an immunoglobulin.
Autoimmune—An immune reaction of a patient
against their own cells.
Humanization—Fusing the constant and variable
framework region of one or more human immunoglobulins with the binding region of an animal
immunoglobulin, done to reduce human reaction
against the fusion antibody.
Monoclonal—Genetically engineered antibodies
specific for one antigen.
Tumor lysis syndrome—A side effect of some immunotherapies, like monoclonal antibodies, that lyse
the tumor cells, due to the toxicity of flooding the
bloodstream with such a quantity of cellular contents.

approved treatments for B-CLL another option. As
most patients with B-CLL are in stage III or IV by the
time both alkylating agents and fludarabine have been
tried, the experience with alemtuzumab treatment are
primarily with those stages of the disease. In clinical
trials, about 30% of patients had a partial response to
the drug, with 2% of these being complete responses.
This antibody has been tested with limited success in the treatment of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(NHL) and for the preparation of patients with various immune cell malignancies for bone marrow
transplantation. There is also a clinical trial ongoing
to test the ability of this antibody to prevent rejection
in kidney transplantation.

Description
Alemtuzumab is produced in the laboratory using
genetically engineered single clones of B-cells. Like all
antibodies, it is a Y-shaped molecule can bind one
particular substance, the antigen for that monoclonal
antibody. For alemtuzumab, the antigen is CD52, a
protein found on the surface of normal and malignant
B and T cells as well as other cells of the immune and
male reproductive systems. Alemtuzumab is a humanized antibody, meaning that the regions that bind
CD52, located on the tips of the Y branches, are
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

derived from rat antibodies, but the rest of the antibody is human sequence. The presence of the human
sequences helps to reduce the immune response by the
patient against the antibody itself, a problem seen
when complete mouse antibodies are used for cancer
therapies. The human sequences also help to ensure
that the various cell-destroying mechanisms of the
human immune system are properly triggered with
binding of the antibody.
Alemtuzumab was approved in May of 2001 for the
treatment of refractory B-CLL. It is approved for use
alone but clinical trials have tested the ability of the antibody to be used in combination with the purine analogs
pentostatin, fludarabine, and cladribine, and rituximab,
a monoclonal antibody specific for the CD20 antigen,
another protein found on the surface of B cells.

Recommended dosage
This antibody should be administered in a gradually escalating pattern at the start of treatment and any
time administration is interrupted for seven or more
days. The recommended beginning dosage for B-CLL
patients is a daily dose of 3 mg of Campath administered as a two-hour IV infusion. Once this amount is
tolerated, the dose is increased to 10 mg per day. After
tolerating this dose, it can be increased to 30 mg, administered three days a week. Acetominophen and diphenhydramine hydrochoride are given thirty to sixty
minutes before the infusion to help reduce side effects.
Additionally, patients generally receive anti-infective medication before treatment to help minimize the
serious opportunistic infections that can result from this
treatment. Specifically, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
(to prevent bacterial infections) and famciclovir (to prevent viral infections) were used during the clinical trial to
decrease infections, although they were not eliminated.

Precautions
Blood studies should be done on a weekly basis while
patients are receiving the alemtuzumab treatment.
Vaccination during the treatment session is not recommended, given the T cell depletion that occurs during
treatment. Furthermore, given that antibodies like alumtuzumab can pass through the placenta to the developing
fetus and in breast milk, use during pregnancy and breastfeeding is not recommended unless clearly needed.

Side effects
A severe side effect of alemtuzumab treatment is
the possible depletion of one or more types of blood
109

Alemtuzumab

KEY TERMS

Alexander technique

cells. Because CD52 is expressed on a patient’s normal
B and T cells, as well as on the surface of the abnormal
B cells, the treatment eliminates both normal and
cancerous cells. The treatment also seems to trigger
autoimmune reactions against various other blood
cells. This results in severe reduction of the many
circulating blood cells including red blood cells (anemia), white blood cells (neutropenia), and clotting cells
(thrombopenia). These conditions are treated with
blood transfusions. The great majority of patients
treated exhibit some type of blood cell depletion.
A second serious side effect of this drug is the
prevalence of opportunistic infections that occurs during the treatment. Serious, and sometimes fatal bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoan infections have
been reported. Treatments to prevent pneumonia and
herpes infections reduce, but do not eliminate these
infections.
The majority of other side effects occur after or
during the first infusion of the drug. Some common
side effects of this drug include fever and chills, nausea
and vomiting, diarrhea, shortness of breath, skin rash,
and unusual fatigue. This drug can also cause low
blood pressure (hypotension).
In patients with high tumor burden (a large number of circulating malignant B cells) this drug can
cause a side effect called tumor lysis syndrome.
Thought to be due to the release of the lysed cells’
contents into the blood stream, it can cause a misbalance of urea, uric acid, phosphate, potassium, and
calcium in the urine and blood. Patients at risk for
this side effect must keep hydrated and can be given
allopurinol before infusion.

Purpose
Because the Alexander technique helps students
improve overall functioning, both mental and physical, it offers a wide range of benefits. Nikolaas
Tinbergen, in his 1973 Nobel lecture, hailed the ‘‘striking improvements in such diverse things as high blood
pressure, breathing, depth of sleep, overall cheerfulness and mental alertness, resilience against outside
pressures, and the refined skill of playing a musical
instrument.’’ He went on to quote a list of other conditions helped by the Alexander technique: ‘‘rheumatism, including various forms of arthritis, then
respiratory troubles, and even potentially lethal
asthma; following in their wake, circulation defects,
which may lead to high blood pressure and also to
some dangerous heart conditions; gastrointestinal disorders of many types, various gynecological conditions, sexual failures, migraines and depressive states.’’
Literature in the 1980s and 1990s went on to
include improvements in back pain, chronic pain, postural problems, repetitive strain injury, benefits during
pregnancy and childbirth, help in applying physical
therapy and rehabilitative exercises, improvements in
strain caused by computer use, improvements in the
posture and performance of school children, and
improvements in vocal and dramatic performance
among the benefits offered by the technique.

Description

Interactions
There have been no formal drug interaction studies done for alemtuzumab.
Michelle Johnson, MS, JD

Alendronate see Bone disorder drugs

I Alexander technique
Definition
The Alexander technique is a somatic method
for improving physical and mental functioning.
Excessive tension, which Frederick Alexander, the
originator, recognized as both physical and mental,
110

restricts movement and creates pressure in the joints,
the spine, the breathing mechanism, and other organs.
The goal of the technique is to restore freedom and
expression to the body and clear thinking to the mind.

Origins
Frederick Matthias Alexander was born in 1869 in
Tasmania, Australia. He became an actor and
Shakespearean reciter, and early in his career he
began to suffer from strain on his vocal chords. He
sought medical attention for chronic hoarseness, but
after treatment with a recommended prescription and
extensive periods of rest, his problem persisted.
Alexander realized that his hoarseness began
about an hour into a dramatic performance and
reasoned that it was something he did in the process
of reciting that caused him to lose his voice. Returning
to his medical doctor, Alexander told him of his
observation. When the doctor admitted that he
didn’t know what Alexander was doing to injure
his vocal chords, Alexander decided to try and find
out for himself.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Direction—Bringing about the free balance of the
head on the spine and the resulting release of the
erector muscles of the back and legs which establish improved coordination.
Habit—Referring to the particular set of physical
and mental tensions present in any individual.
Inhibition—Referring to the moment in an
Alexander lesson when the student refrains from
beginning a movement in order to avoid tensing
of the muscles.
Sensory awareness—Bringing attention to the sensations of tension and/or release in the muscles.

Thus began a decade of self-observation and discovery. Using as many as three mirrors to observe himself in
the act of reciting, normal speaking, and later standing,
walking, and sitting, Alexander managed to improve
his coordination and to overcome his vocal problems.
One of his most startling discoveries was that in order to
change the way he used his body he had to change the
way he was thinking, redirecting his thoughts in such a
way that he did not produce unnecessary tension
when he attempted speech or movement. After making
this discovery at the end of the nineteenth century,
Alexander became a pioneer in body-mind medicine.
At first, performers and dancers sought guidance
from Alexander to overcome physical complaints and
to improve the expression and spontaneity of their
performances. Soon a great number of people sought
help from his teaching for a variety of physical and
mental disorders.
The Alexander technique is primarily taught oneon-one in private lessons. Introductory workshops or
workshops for special applications of the technique
(e.g.,workshops for musicians) are also common.
Private lessons range from a half-hour to an hour in
length, and are taught in a series. The number of lessons
varies according to the severity of the student’s difficulties with coordination or to the extent of the student’s
interest in pursuing the improvements made possible by
continued study. The cost of lessons ranges from $40-80
per hour. Insurance coverage is not widely available,
but discounts are available for participants in some
complementary care insurance plans. Pre-tax Flexible
Spending Accounts for health care cover Alexander
technique lessons if they are prescribed by a physician.
In lessons teachers guide students through simple
movements (while students are dressed in comfortable
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

clothing) and use their hands to help students identify
and stop destructive patterns of tension. Tensing
arises from mental processes as well as physical, so
discussions of personal reactions or behavior are likely
to arise in the course of a lesson.
The technique helps students move with ease and
improved coordination. At the beginning of a movement (the lessons are a series of movements), most people pull back their heads, raise their shoulders toward
their ears, over-arch their lower backs, tighten their legs,
and otherwise produce excessive tension in their bodies.
Alexander referred to this as misuse of the body.
At any point in a movement, proper use can be
established. If the neck muscles are not over-tensed,
the head will carry slightly forward of the spine, simply
because it is heavier in the front. When the head is out
of balance in the forward direction, it sets off a series
of stretch reflexes in the extensor muscles of the back.
It is skillful use of these reflexes, along with reflex
activity in the feet and legs, the arms and hands, the
breathing mechanism, and other parts of the body,
that lessons in the technique aim to develop.
Alexander found that optimal functioning of the
body was very hard to maintain, even for the short
period of time it took to complete a single movement.
People, especially adults, have very strong tension
habits associated with movement. Chronic misuse of
the muscles is common. It may be caused by slouching
in front of televisions or video monitors, too much
sitting or driving and too little walking, or by tension
associated with past traumas and injuries. Stiffening
the neck after a whiplash injury or favoring a broken or
sprained leg long after it has healed are examples of
habitual tension caused by injury.
The first thing a teacher of the Alexander technique does is to increase a student’s sensory awareness
of this excessive habitual tension, particularly that in
the neck and spine. Next the student is taught to
inhibit the tension. If the student prepares to sit
down, for example, he will tense his muscles in his
habitual way. If he is asked to put aside the intention
to sit and instead to free his neck and allow less constriction in his muscles, he can begin to change his
tense habitual response to sitting.
By leaving the head resting on the spine in its
natural free balance, by keeping eyes open and
focused, not held in a tense stare, by allowing the
shoulders to release, the knees to unlock and the
back to lengthen and widen, a student greatly reduces
strain. In Alexander lessons students learn to direct
themselves this way in activity and become skilled in
fluid, coordinated movement.
111

Alexander technique

KEY TERMS

Alkaline phosphatase test

Precautions

Resources

Side effects

BOOKS

The focus of the Alexander technique is educational. Teachers use their hands simply to gently guide
students in movement. Therefore, both contraindications and potential physiological side effects are kept
to a minimum. No forceful treatment of soft tissue or
bony structure is attempted, so damage to tissues, even
in the case of errors in teaching, is unlikely.
As students’ sensory awareness develops in the
course of Alexander lessons, they become more
acutely aware of chronic tension patterns. As students
learn to release excessive tension in their muscles and
to sustain this release in daily activity, they may
experience tightness or soreness in the connective tissue. This is caused by the connective tissue adapting to
the lengthened and released muscles and the expanded
range of movement in the joints.
Occasionally students may get light-headed during a lesson as contracted muscles release and effect
the circulatory or respiratory functioning.
Forceful contraction of muscles and rigid postures often indicate suppression of emotion. As muscles release during or after an Alexander lesson,
students may experience strong surges of emotion or
sudden changes in mood. In some cases, somatic memories surface, bringing to consciousness past injury or
trauma. This can cause extreme anxiety, and referrals
may be made by the teacher for counseling.

Dimon, Theodore. THE UNDIVIDED SELF: Alexander
Technique and the Control of Stress. North Atlantic
Books: 1999.
ORGANIZATIONS

Alexander Technique International, 1692 Massachusetts
Ave., 3rd Floor, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA. (888)
321-0856. Fax: 617-497-2615. ati@ati-net.com.
<http://www.ati-net.com>.
OTHER

Alexander Technique Resource Guide. (Includes list of
teachers) AmSAT Books. (800) 473-0620 or (804)
295-2840.

Sandra Bain Cushman

Alkali-resistant hemoglobin test see Fetal
hemoglobin test

I Alkaline phosphatase test
Definition
Alkaline phosphatase is an enzyme found
throughout the body. Like all enzymes, it is needed,
in small amounts, to trigger specific chemical reactions. When it is present in large amounts, it may
signify bone or liver disease or a tumor.

Research and general acceptance
Alexander became well known among the intellectual, artistic, and medical communities in London,
England, during the first half of the twentieth century.
Among Alexander’s supporters were John Dewey,
Aldous Huxley, Bernard Shaw, and renowned scientists Raymond Dart, G.E. Coghill, Charles
Sherrington, and Nikolaas Tinbergen.
Researchers continue to study the effects and
applications of the technique in the fields of education,
preventive medicine, and rehabilitation. The
Alexander technique has proven an effective treatment
for reducing stress, for improving posture and performance in schoolchildren, for relieving chronic pain,
and for improving psychological functioning. The
technique has been found to be as effective as betablocker medications in controlling stress responses in
professional musicians, to enhance respiratory function in normal adults, and to mediate the effects of
scoliosis in adolescents and adults.
112

Purpose
Medical testing of alkaline phosphatase is concerned with the enzyme that is found in liver, bone,
placenta, and intestine. In a healthy liver, fluid containing alkaline phosphate and other substances is
continually drained away through the bile duct. In a
diseased liver, this bile duct is often blocked, keeping
fluid within the liver. Alkaline phosphatase accumulates and eventually escapes into the bloodstream.
The alkaline phosphatase of the liver is produced by
the cells lining the small bile ducts (ductoles) in the liver.
Its origin differs from that of other enzymes called
aminotransferases. If the liver disease is primarily of
an obstructive nature (cholestatic), i.e. involving the
biliary drainage system, the alkaline phosphatase will
be the first and foremost enzyme elevation. If, on the
other hand, the disease is primarily of the liver cells
(hepatocytes), the aminotransferases will rise prominently. Thus, these enzymes are very useful in
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Alkaline phosphatase—An enzyme found throughout the body, primarily in liver, bone, placenta, and
intestine.
Cholestatis—Stoppage or suppression of the flow
of bile.
Enzyme—A substance needed to trigger specific
chemical reactions.
Hepatocellular—Of or pertaining to liver cells.
Hepatocyte—A liver cell.
Isoenzyme—A variation of an enzyme.

distinguishing the type of liver disease–cholestatic or
hepatocellular.
Growing bones need alkaline phosphatase. Any
condition of bone growth will cause alkaline phosphatase levels to rise. The condition may be normal, such
as a childhood growth spurt or the healing of a broken
bone; or the condition may be a disease, such as bone
cancer, Paget’s disease, or rickets.
During pregnancy, alkaline phosphatase is made
by the placenta and leaks into the mother’s bloodstream. This is normal. Some tumors, however, start
production of the same kind of alkaline phosphatase
produced by the placenta. These tumors are called
germ cell tumors and include testicular cancer and
certain brain tumors.
Alkaline phosphatase from the intestine is
increased in a person with inflammatory bowel disease, such as ulcerative colitis.

Description
Alkaline phosphatase is measured by combining
the person’s serum with specific substances with which
alkaline phosphatase is known to react. The end
product of this reaction is measured; and from that
measurement, the amount of alkaline phosphatase in
the person’s serum is determined.
Each tissue–liver, bone, placenta, and intestine–
produces a slightly different alkaline phosphatase.
These variations are called isoenzymes. In the laboratory, alkaline phosphatase is measured as the total
amount or the amount of each of the the four isoenzymes. The isoenzymes react differently to heat, certain chemicals, and other processes in the laboratory.
Methods to measure them separately are based on
these differences.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The test is covered by insurance when medically
necessary. Results are usually available the next day.

Preparation
To collect the 5-10 ml blood needed for this test, a
healthcare worker ties a tourniquet on the person’s
upper arm, locates a vein in the inner elbow region,
and inserts a needle into that vein. Vacuum action
draws the blood through the needle into an attached
tube. Collection of the sample takes only a few minutes.
A person being tested for alkaline phosphatase
should not have anything to eat or drink, except
water, for eight to ten hours before the test. Some
people release alkaline phosphatase from the intestine
into the bloodstream after eating. This will temporarily increase the result of the test.

Aftercare
Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
site or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to
the puncture site until the bleeding stops will reduce
bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site will relieve
discomfort.

Normal results
Normal results vary by age and by sex. They also
vary based on the laboratory and the method used.

Abnormal results
Bone and liver disease increase alkaline phosphatase more than any other disease, up to five times the
normal level. Irritable bowel disease, germ cell tumors,
and infections involving the liver, such as viral hepatitis and infectious mononucleosis, increase the enzyme
also, but to a lesser degree. Healing bones, pregnancy,
and normal growth in children also increase levels.
Resources
BOOKS

Lehmann, Craig A., editor. Saunders Manual of Clinical
Laboratory Science. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders
Co., 1998.

Nancy J. Nordenson

Alkalosis see Metabolic alkalosis;
Respiratory alkalosis
Allergic alveolitis see Hypersensitivity
pneumonitis
113

Alkaline phosphatase test

KEY TERMS

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis

I Allergic
bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis
Definition
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, or
ABPA, is one of four major types of infections in
humans caused by Aspergillus fungi. ABPA is a hypersensitivity reaction that occurs in asthma patients who
are allergic to this specific fungus.

Description
ABPA is an allergic reaction to a species of
Aspergillus called Aspergillus fumigatus. It is sometimes grouped together with other lung disorders
characterized by eosinophilia–an abnormal increase
of a certain type of white blood cell in the blood–
under the heading of eosinophilic pneumonia. These
disorders are also called hypersensitivity lung
diseases.
ABPA appears to be increasing in frequency in the
United States, although the reasons for the increase
are not clear. The disorder is most likely to occur in
adult asthmatics aged 20-40. It affects males and
females equally.

Causes and symptoms
ABPA develops when the patient breathes air
containing Aspergillus spores. These spores are
found worldwide, especially around riverbanks,
marshes, bogs, forests, and wherever there is wet or
decaying vegetation. They are also found on wet
paint, construction materials, and in air conditioning systems. ABPA is a nosocomial infection,
which means that a patient can get it in a hospital.
When Aspergillus spores reach the bronchi, which
are the branches of the windpipe that lead into the
lungs, the bronchi react by contracting spasmodically. So the patient has difficulty breathing and
usually wheezes or coughs. Many patients with
ABPA also run a low-grade fever and lose their
appetites.
Complications
Patients with ABPA sometimes cough up large
amounts of blood, a condition that is called hemoptysis. They may also develop a serious long-term form of
bronchiectasis, the formation of fibrous tissue in the
lungs. Bronchiectasis is a chronic bronchial disorder
caused by repeated inflammation of the airway, and

114

KEY TERMS
Antifungal—A medicine used to treat infections
caused by a fungus.
Antigen—A substance that stimulates the production of antibodies.
Bronchiectasis—A disorder of the bronchial tubes
marked by abnormal stretching, enlargement, or
destruction of the walls. Bronchiectasis is usually
caused by recurrent inflammation of the airway
and is a diagnostic criterion of ABPA.
Bronchodilator— A medicine used to open up the
bronchial tubes (air passages) of the lungs.
Eosinophil—A type of white blood cell containing
granules that can be stained by eosin (a chemical
that produces a red stain).
Eosinophilia—An abnormal increase in the number
of eosinophils in the blood.
Hemoptysis—The coughing up of large amounts of
blood. Hemoptysis can occur as a complication of
ABPA.
Hypersensitivity—An excessive response by the
body to a foreign substance.
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)—A type of protein in
blood plasma that acts as an antibody to activate
allergic reactions. About 50% of patients with allergic disorders have increased IgE levels in their
blood serum.
Nosocomial infection—An infection that can be
acquired in a hospital. ABPA is a nosocomial
infection.
Precipitin—An antibody in blood that combines
with an antigen to form a solid that separates from
the rest of the blood.
Spirometer—An instrument used to test a patient’s
lung capacity.
‘‘Wheal and flare’’ reaction—A rapid response to a
skin allergy test characterized by the development
of a red, itching spot in the area where the allergen
was injected.
Wheezing—A whistling or musical sound caused
by tightening of the air passages inside the patient’s
chest.

marked by the abnormal enlargement of, or damage
to, the bronchial walls. ABPA sometimes occurs as a
complication of cystic fibrosis.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The diagnosis of ABPA is based on a combination
of the patient’s history and the results of blood tests,
sputum tests, skin tests, and diagnostic imaging. The
doctor will be concerned to distinguish between ABPA
and a worsening of the patient’s asthma, cystic fibrosis, or
other lung disorders. There are seven major criteria for
a diagnosis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis:


a history of asthma.



an accumulation of fluid in the lung that is visible on
a chest x ray.



bronchiectasis (abnormal stretching, enlarging, or
destruction of the walls of the bronchial tubes).



skin reaction to Aspergillus antigen.



eosinophilia in the patient’s blood and sputum.



Aspergillus precipitins in the patient’s blood.
Precipitins are antibodies that react with the antigen
to form a solid that separates from the rest of the
solution in the test tube.



a high level of IgE in the patient’s blood. IgE refers to
a class of antibodies in blood plasma that activate
allergic reactions to foreign particles.

Other criteria that may be used to support the
diagnosis include the presence of Aspergillus in samples of the patient’s sputum, the coughing up of plugs
of brown mucus, or a late skin reaction to the
Aspergillus antigen.
Laboratory tests
The laboratory tests that are done to obtain this
information include a complete blood count (CBC), a
sputum culture, a blood serum test of IgE levels, and
a skin test for the Aspergillus antigen. In the skin test, a
small amount of antigen is injected into the upper
layer of skin on the patient’s forearm about four
inches below the elbow. If the patient has a high
level of IgE antibodies in the tissue, he or she will
develop what is called a ‘‘wheal and flare’’ reaction
in about 15-20 minutes. A ‘‘wheal and flare’’ reaction
is characterized by the eruption of a reddened, itching
spot on the skin. Some patients with ABPA will
develop the so-called late reaction to the skin test, in
which a red, sore, swollen area develops about six to
eight hours after the initial reaction.
Diagnostic imaging
Chest x rays and CT scans are used to check for
the presence of fluid accumulation in the lungs and
signs of bronchiectasis.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment
ABPA is usually treated with prednisone
(Meticorten) or other corticosteroids taken by mouth,
and with bronchodilators.
Antifungal drugs are not used to treat ABPA
because it is caused by an allergic reaction to
Aspergillus rather than by direct infection of tissue.
Follow-up care
Patients with ABPA should be given periodic checkups with chest x rays and a spirometer test. A spirometer is
an instrument that evaluates the patient’s lung capacity.

Prognosis
Most patients with ABPA respond well to corticosteroid treatment. Others have a chronic course with
gradual improvement over time. The best indicator of
a good prognosis is a long-term fall in the patient’s IgE
level. Patients with lung complications from ABPA
may develop severe airway obstruction.

Prevention
ABPA is difficult to prevent because Aspergillus is
a common fungus; it can be found in the saliva and
sputum of most healthy individuals. Patients with
ABPA can protect themselves somewhat by avoiding
haystacks, compost piles, bogs, marshes, and other
locations with wet or rotting vegetation; by avoiding
construction sites or newly painted surfaces; and by
having their air conditioners cleaned regularly. Some
patients may be helped by air filtration systems for
their bedrooms or offices.
Resources
BOOKS

Stauffer, John L. ‘‘Lung.’’ In Current Medical Diagnosis and
Treatment, 1998, edited by Stephen McPhee, et al., 37th
ed. Stamford: Appleton & Lange,1997.
ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton
Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404)
639-3311. <http://www.cdc.gov>.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease.
Building 31, Room 7A-50, 31 Center Drive MSC 2520,
Bethesda, MD 20892-2520. (301) 496-5717. <http://
www.niaid.nih.gov/default.htm>.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. P.O. Box 8923,
New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673.
<http://www.rarediseases.org>.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
115

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis

Diagnosis

Allergic purpura

I Allergic purpura
Definition
Allergic purpura (AP) is an allergic reaction of
unknown origin causing red patches on the skin and
other symptoms. AP is also called Henoch-Schonlein
purpura, named after the two doctors who first
described it.

Description
‘‘Purpura’’ is a bleeding disorder that occurs when
capillaries rupture, allowing small amounts of blood
to accumulate in the surrounding tissues. In AP, this
occurs because the capillaries are blocked by protein
complexes formed during an abnormal immune reaction. The skin is the most obvious site of reaction, but
the joints, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys are also
often affected.
AP affects approximately 35,000 people in the
United States each year. Most cases are children
between the ages of two and seven. Boys are affected
more often than girls, and most cases occur from late
fall to winter.

Causes and symptoms
Causes
AP is caused by a reaction involving antibodies,
special proteins of the immune system. Antibodies are
designed to bind with foreign proteins, called antigens.
In some situations, antigen-antibody complexes can
become too large to remain suspended in the bloodstream. When this occurs, they precipitate out and
become lodged in the capillaries. This can cause the
capillary to burst, allowing a local hemorrhage.
The source of the antigen causing AP is unknown.
Antigens may be introduced by bacterial or viral
infection. More than 75% of patients report having had
an infection of the throat, upper respiratory tract, or
gastrointestinal system several weeks before the onset
of AP. Other complex molecules can act as antigens
as well, including drugs such as antibiotics or vaccines.
Otherwise harmless substances that stimulate an immune
reaction are known as allergens. Drug allergens that may
cause AP include penicillin, ampicillin, erythromycin,
and quinine. Vaccines possibly linked to AP include
those for typhoid, measles, cholera, and yellow fever.
Symptoms
The onset of AP may be preceded by a headache,
fever, and loss of appetite. Most patients first develop
116

KEY TERMS
Glomeruli—Knots of capillaries in the kidneys
responsible for filtering the blood (singular,
glomerulus).
an itchy skin rash. The rash is red, either flat or raised,
and may be small and freckle-like. The rash may also
be larger, resembling a bruise. Rashes become purple
and then rust colored over the course of a day, and
fade after several weeks. Rashes are most common on
the buttocks, abdomen, and lower extremities. Rashes
higher on the body may also occur, especially in
younger children.
Joint pain and swelling is common, especially
in the knees and ankles. Abdominal pain occurs in
almost all patients, along with blood in the body
waste (feces). About half of all patients show blood
in the urine, low urine volume, or other signs of kidney
involvement. Kidney failure may occur due to widespread obstruction of the capillaries in the filtering
structures called glomeruli. Kidney failure develops
in about 5% of all patients, and in 15% of those with
elevated blood or protein in the urine.
Less common symptoms include prolonged headache, fever, and pain and swelling of the scrotum.
Involvement of other organ systems may lead to
heart attack (myocardial infarction), inflammation of
the pancreas (pancreatitis), intestinal obstruction, or
bowel perforation.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of AP is based on the symptoms and
their development, a careful medical history, and
blood and urine tests. X rays or computed tomography scans (CT) may be performed to assess complications in the bowel or other internal organs.

Treatment
Most cases of AP resolve completely without
treatment. Nonetheless, a hospital stay is required
because of the possibility of serious complications.
Non-aspirin pain relievers may be given for joint
pain. Corticosteroids (like prednisone) are sometimes
used, although not all specialists agree on their utility.
Kidney involvement requires monitoring and correction of blood fluids and electrolytes.
Patients with severe kidney complications may
require a kidney biopsy so that tissue can be analyzed.
Even after all other symptoms subside, elevated levels
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Allergic rhinitis

of blood or protein in the urine may persist for months
and require regular monitoring. Hypertension or kidney failure may develop months or even years after the
acute phase of the disease. Kidney failure requires
dialysis or transplantation.

Prognosis
Most people who develop AP become better on
their own after several weeks. About half of all
patients have at least one recurrence. Cases that do
not have kidney complications usually have the best
prognosis.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Andreoli, S. P. ‘‘Chronic Glomerulonephritis in
Childhood. Membranoproliferative
Glomerulonephritis, Henoch-Schonlein
PurpuraNnephritis, and IgA Nephropathy.’’ Pediatric
Clinics of North America 42, no. 6 (December 1995):
1487-1503.
OTHER

‘‘Henoch-Schonlein Purpura.’’ Vanderbilt University
Medical Center. <http://www.mc.vanderbilt.edu/
peds/pidl/nephro/henoch.html>.

Richard Robinson

Allergic rhinitis

This illustration depicts excessive mucus production in the
nose after inhalation of airborne pollen. (Photo Researchers,
Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

Definition
Allergic rhinitis, more commonly referred to as
hay fever, is an inflammation of the nasal passages
caused by allergic reaction to airborne substances.

Description
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is the most common allergic
condition and one of the most common of all minor
afflictions. It affects between 10-20% of all people in the
United States, and is responsible for 2.5% of all doctor
visits. Antihistamines and other drugs used to treat allergic rhinitis make up a significant fraction of both
prescription and over-the-counter drug sales each year.
There are two types of allergic rhinitis: seasonal
and perennial. Seasonal AR occurs in the spring, summer, and early fall, when airborne plant pollens are at
their highest levels. In fact, the term hay fever is really
a misnomer, since allergy to grass pollen is only one
cause of symptoms for most people. Perennial AR
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

occurs all year and is usually caused by home or workplace airborne pollutants. A person can be affected
by one or both types. Symptoms of seasonal AR are
worst after being outdoors, while symptoms of perennial AR are worst after spending time indoors.
Both types of allergies can develop at any age,
although onset in childhood through early adulthood
is most common. Although allergy to a particular
substance is not inherited, increased allergic sensitivity
may ‘‘run in the family.’’ While allergies can improve
on their own over time, they can also become worse
over time.

Causes and symptoms
Causes
Allergic rhinitis is a type of immune reaction.
Normally, the immune system responds to foreign
117

Allergic rhinitis

KEY TERMS
Allergen—A substance that provokes an allergic
response.
Anaphylaxis—Increased sensitivity caused by previous exposure to an allergen1 that can result in
blood vessel dilation (swelling) and smooth muscle
contraction. Anaphylaxis can result in sharp blood
pressure drops and difficulty breathing.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
immune system in response to a specific foreign
protein or particle called an antigen.
Antigen—A foreign protein to which the body
reacts by making antibodies.
Granules—Small packets of reactive chemicals
stored within cells.
Histamine—A chemical released by mast cells that
activates pain receptors and causes cells to become
leaky.
Mast cells—A type of immune system cell that is
found in the lining of the nasal passages and eyelids, displays a type of antibody called immunoglobulin type E (IgE) on its cell surface, and participates
in the allergic response by releasing histamine from
intracellular granules.

microorganisms, or particles, like pollen or dust, by
producing specific proteins, called antibodies, that are
capable of binding to identifying molecules, or antigens,
on the foreign particle. This reaction between antibody
and antigen sets off a series of reactions designed to
protect the body from infection. Sometimes, this same
series of reactions is triggered by harmless, everyday
substances. This is the condition known as allergy,
and the offending substance is called an allergen.
Like all allergic reactions, AR involves a special
set of cells in the immune system known as mast cells.
Mast cells, found in the lining of the nasal passages
and eyelids, display a special type of antibody, called
immunoglobulin type E (IgE), on their surface. Inside,
mast cells store reactive chemicals in small packets,
called granules. When the antibodies encounter
allergens, they trigger release of the granules, which
spill out their chemicals onto neighboring cells, including blood vessels and nerve cells. One of these
chemicals, histamine, binds to the surfaces of these
other cells, through special proteins called histamine
receptors. Interaction of histamine with receptors on
blood vessels causes neighboring cells to become
leaky, leading to the fluid collection, swelling, and
118

increased redness characteristic of a runny nose and
red, irritated eyes. Histamine also stimulates pain
receptors, causing the itchy, scratchy nose, eyes, and
throat common in allergic rhinitis.
The number of possible airborne allergens is
enormous. Seasonal AR is most commonly caused
by grass and tree pollens, since their pollen is produced
in large amounts and is dispersed by the wind. Showy
flowers, like roses or lilacs, that attract insects produce
a sticky pollen that is less likely to become airborne.
Different plants release their pollen at different times
of the year, so seasonal AR sufferers may be most
affected in spring, summer, or fall, depending on
which plants provoke a response. The amount of pollen
in the air is reflected in the pollen count, often broadcast on the daily news during allergy season. Pollen
counts tend to be lower after a good rain that washes
the pollen out of the air and higher on warm, dry,
windy days.
Virtually any type of tree or grass may cause AR.
A few types of weeds that tend to cause the most
trouble for people include the following:


ragweed



sagebrush



lamb’s-quarters



plantain



pigweed



dock/sorrel



tumbleweed

Perennial AR is often triggered by house dust, a
complicated mixture of airborne particles, many of
which are potent allergens. House dust contains
some or all of the following:


house mite body parts. All houses contain large numbers of microscopic insects called house mites. These
harmless insects feed on fibers, fur, and skin shed by
the house’s larger occupants. Their tiny body parts
easily become airborne.



animal dander. Animals constantly shed fur, skin
flakes, and dried saliva. Carried in the air, or transferred from pet to owner by direct contact, dander
can cause allergy in many sensitive people.



mold spores. Molds live in damp spots throughout
the house, including basements, bathrooms, air
ducts, air conditioners, refrigerator drains, damp
windowsills, mattresses, and stuffed furniture.
Mildew and other molds release airborne spores
that circulate throughout the house.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE



cigarette smoke



perfume



cosmetics



cleansers



copier chemicals



industrial chemicals



construction material gases
Symptoms

Inflammation of the nose, or rhinitis, is the
major symptom of AR. Inflammation causes itching,
sneezing, runny nose, redness, and tenderness. Sinus
swelling can constrict the eustachian tube that connects the inner ear to the throat, causing a congested
feeling and ‘‘ear popping.’’ The drip of mucus from the
sinuses down the back of the throat, combined with
increased sensitivity, can also lead to throat irritation
and redness. AR usually also causes redness, itching,
and watery eyes. Fatigue and headache are also
common.

Diagnosis
Diagnosing seasonal AR is usually easy and can
often be done without a medical specialist. When
symptoms appear in spring or summer and disappear
with the onset of cold weather, seasonal AR is almost
certainly the culprit. Other causes of rhinitis, including infection, can usually be ruled out by a physical
examination and a nasal smear, in which a sample of
mucus is taken on a swab for examination.
Allergy tests, including skin testing and provocation testing, can help identify the precise culprit,
but may not be done unless a single source is
suspected and subsequent avoidance is possible.
Skin testing involves placing a small amount of
liquid containing a specific allergen on the skin and
then either poking, scratching, or injecting it into
the skin surface to observe whether redness and
swellings occurs. Provocation testing involves challenging an individual with either a small amount of
an inhalable or ingestable allergen to see if a response
is elicited.
Perennial AR can also usually be diagnosed by
careful questioning about the timing of exposure
and the onset of symptoms. Specific allergens can be
identified through allergy skin testing.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment
Avoidance of the allergens is the best treatment,
but this is often not possible. When it is not possible to
avoid one or more allergens, there are two major forms
of medical treatment, drugs and immunotherapy.
Drugs
ANTIHISTAMINES. Antihistamines block the histamine receptors on nasal tissue, decreasing the effect of
histamine release by mast cells. They may be used after
symptoms appear, though they may be even more
effective when used preventively, before symptoms
appear. A wide variety of antihistamines are available.

Older antihistamines often produce drowsiness as
a major side effect. Such antihistamines include the
following:


diphenhydramine (Benadryl and generics)



chlorpheniramine (Chlor-trimeton and generics)



brompheniramine (Dimetane and generics)



clemastine (Tavist and generics).

Newer antihistamines that do not cause drowsiness are available by prescription and include the
following:


astemizole (Hismanal)



fexofenadine (Allegra)



cetirizine (Zyrtec)



azelastin HCl (Astelin).

Loratidine (Claritin) was available only by prescription but was released to over-the-counter status
by the FDA.
Hismanal has the potential to cause serious heart
arrhythmias when taken with the antibiotic erythromycin, the antifungal drugs ketoconazole and itraconazole, or the antimalarial drug quinine. Taking more than
the recommended dose of Hismanal can also cause
arrhythimas. Seldane (terfenadine), the original nondrowsy antihistamine, was voluntarily withdrawn from
the market by its manufacturers in early 1998 because
of this potential and because of the availability of an
equally effective, safer alternative drug, fexofenadine.
LEUKOTRIENE RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (montelukast or Singulair
and zafirlukast or Accolate) are a newer class of drugs
used daily to help prevent asthma. They’ve also become
approved in the United States to treat allergic rhinitis.
DECONGESTANTS. Decongestants constrict blood
vessels to counteract the effects of histamine. This
decreases the amount of blood in the nasopahryngeal

119

Allergic rhinitis

Other potential causes of perennial allergic rhinitis include the following:

Allergic rhinitis

and sinus mucosa and reduces swelling. Nasal sprays
are available that can be applied directly to the nasal
lining and oral systemic preparations are available.
Decongestants are stimulants and may cause increased
heart rate and blood pressure, headaches, isomnia,
agitation and difficulty emptying the bladder. Use of
topical decongestants for longer than several days can
cause loss of effectiveness and rebound congestion, in
which nasal passages become more severely swollen
than before treatment.

symptom relief, western herbal remedies including eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis) and nettle (Urtica dioica) may
be helpful. Bee pollen may also be effective in alleviating
or eliminating AR symptoms. A 2004 report said that
phototherapy (treatment with a combination of ultraviolet and visible light) decreased the symptoms of allergic
rhinitis in a majority of patients who did not respond well
to traditional drug treatment.

TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROIDS. Topical corticosteroids reduce mucous membrane inflammation and are
available by prescription. Allergies tend to become
worse as the season progresses because the immune
system becomes sensitized to particular antigens and
can produce a faster, stronger response. Topical
corticosteroids are especially effective at reducing this
seasonal sensitization because they work more slowly
and last longer than most other medication types. As
a result, they are best started before allergy season
begins. Side effects are usually mild, but may include
headaches, nosebleeds, and unpleasant taste sensations.

Most people with AR can achieve adequate relief
with a combination of preventive strategies and treatment. While allergies may improve over time, they
may also get worse or expand to include new allergens.
Early treatment can help prevent an increased sensitization to other allergens.

Prognosis

Prevention
Reducing exposure to pollen may improve symptoms of seasonal AR. Strategies include the following:


stay indoors with windows closed during the morning hours, when pollen levels are highest



keep car windows up while driving



use a surgical face mask when outside



avoid uncut fields



learn which trees are producing pollen in which seasons, and avoid forests at the height of pollen season



wash clothes and hair after being outside



clean air conditioner filters in the home regularly



use electrostatic filters for central air conditioning

MAST CELL STABILIZERS. Cromolyn sodium pre-

vents the release of mast cell granules, thereby preventing release of histamine and the other chemicals
contained in them. It acts as a preventive treatment if it
is begun several weeks before the onset of the allergy
season. It can be used for perennial AR as well.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy, also known as desensitization or
allergy shots, alters the balance of antibody types in the
body, thereby reducing the ability of IgE to cause allergic
reactions. Immunotherapy is preceded by allergy testing
to determine the precise allergens responsible. Injections
involve very small but gradually increasing amounts of
allergen, over several weeks or months, with periodic
boosters. Full benefits may take up to several years to
achieve and are not seen at all in about one in five
patients. Individuals receiving all shots will be monitored closely following each shot because of the small
risk of anaphylaxis, a condition that can result in difficulty breathing and a sharp drop in blood pressure.

Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for AR often focus on modulation of the body’s immune response, and
frequently center around diet and lifestyle adjustments.
Chinese herbal medicine can help rebalance a person’s
system, as can both acute and constitutional homeopathic treatment. Vitamin C in substantial amounts can
help stabilize the mucous membrane response. For
120

Moving to a region with lower pollen levels is
rarely effective, since new allergies often develop
Preventing perennial AR requires identification of
the responsible allergens.
Mold spores:


keep the house dry through ventilation and use of
dehumidifiers



use a disinfectant such as dilute bleach to clean
surfaces such as bathroom floors and walls



have ducts cleaned and disinfected



clean and disinfect air conditioners and coolers



throw out moldy or mildewed books, shoes, pillows,
or furniture
House dust:



vacuum frequently, and change the bag regularly. Use
a bag with small pores to catch extra-fine particles
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

clean floors and walls with a damp mop



install electrostatic filters in heating and cooling
ducts, and change all filters regularly
Animal dander:



avoid contact if possible



wash hands after contact



vacuum frequently



keep pets out of the bedroom, and off furniture, rugs,
and other dander-catching surfaces



have your pets bathed and groomed frequently

Resources
PERIODICALS

Finn, Robert. ‘‘Rhinoohototherapy Targets Allergic
Rhinitis.’’ Skin & Allergy News (July 2004): 62.
‘‘What’s New in: Asthma and Allergic Rhinitis.’’ Pulse
(September 20, 2004): 50.

Richard Robinson
Teresa G. Odle

I Allergies
Definition
Allergies are abnormal reactions of the immune
system that occur in response to otherwise harmless
substances.

Description
Allergies are among the most common of medical
disorders. It is estimated that 60 million Americans, or
more than one in every five people, suffer from some
form of allergy, with similar proportions throughout
much of the rest of the world. Allergy is the single
largest reason for school absence and is a major source
of lost productivity in the workplace.
An allergy is a type of immune reaction. Normally,
the immune system responds to foreign microorganisms or particles by producing specific proteins called
antibodies. These antibodies are capable of binding
to identifying molecules, or antigens, on the foreign
particle. This reaction between antibody and antigen
sets off a series of chemical reactions designed to protect the body from infection. Sometimes, this same
series of reactions is triggered by harmless, everyday
substances such as pollen, dust, and animal danders.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

When this occurs, an allergy develops against the
offending substance (an allergen.)
Mast cells, one of the major players in allergic
reactions, capture and display a particular type of
antibody, called immunoglobulin type E (IgE) that
binds to allergens. Inside mast cells are small chemical-filled packets called granules. Granules contain a
variety of potent chemicals, including histamine.
Immunologists separate allergic reactions into
two main types: immediate hypersensitivity reactions,
which are predominantly mast cell-mediated and
occur within minutes of contact with allergen; and
delayed hypersensitivity reactions, mediated by
T cells (a type of white blood cells) and occurring
hours to days after exposure.
Inhaled or ingested allergens usually cause
immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Allergens bind
to IgE antibodies on the surface of mast cells, which
spill the contents of their granules out onto neighboring cells, including blood vessels and nerve cells.
Histamine binds to the surfaces of these other cells
through special proteins called histamine receptors.
Interaction of histamine with receptors on blood vessels causes increased leakiness, leading to the fluid
collection, swelling and increased redness. Histamine
also stimulates pain receptors, making tissue more
sensitive and irritable. Symptoms last from one to
several hours following contact.
In the upper airways and eyes, immediate hypersensitivity reactions cause the runny nose and itchy,
bloodshot eyes typical of allergic rhinitis. In the gastrointestinal tract, these reactions lead to swelling and
irritation of the intestinal lining, which causes the
cramping and diarrhea typical of food allergy.
Allergens that enter the circulation may cause hives,
angioedema, anaphylaxis, or atopic dermatitis.
Allergens on the skin usually cause delayed hypersensitivity reaction. Roving T cells contact the allergen, setting in motion a more prolonged immune
response. This type of allergic response may develop
over several days following contact with the allergen,
and symptoms may persist for a week or more.

Causes and symptoms
Allergens enter the body through four main
routes: the airways, the skin, the gastrointestinal
tract, and the circulatory system.


Airborne allergens cause the sneezing, runny nose,
and itchy, bloodshot eyes of hay fever (allergic rhinitis). Airborne allergens can also affect the lining of
the lungs, causing asthma, or conjunctivitis (pink
121

Allergies



Allergies

Allergic rhinitis is commonly triggered by
exposure to household dust, animal fur,
or pollen. The foreign substance that
triggers an allergic reaction is called
an allergen.

Pollen grains

The presence of an allergen causes the
body's lymphocytes to begin producing
IgE antibodies. The lymphocytes of an
allergy sufferer produce an unusually
large amount of IgE.

Lymphocyte

FIRST EXPOSURE
IgE
Histamine

IgE molecules attach to mast
cells, which contain histamine.

The allergic response. (Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)

In a future exposure to the same substance,
the antibodies on the mast cells bind to the
allergens, and the cells release their histamine.

SECOND EXPOSURE

Histamine travels to receptor sites in the nasal
passages. When histamine molecules enter the
sites they trigger dilation of the blood vessels,
swelling, irritation, and increased production
of mucus.
Antihistamines

D

Antihistamine drugs block histamine molecules
from entering receptor sites, thus preventing or
reducing swelling, congestion and irritation.

Second and subsequent exposure to allergen. (Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)

122

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Allergen—A substance that provokes an allergic
response.
Allergic rhinitis—Inflammation of the mucous membranes of the nose and eyes in response to an
allergen.
Anaphylaxis—Increased sensitivity caused by previous exposure to an allergen that can result in
blood vessel dilation and smooth muscle contraction. Anaphylaxis can result in sharp blood pressure
drops and difficulty breathing.
Angioedema—Severe non-inflammatory swelling of
the skin, organs, and brain that can also be accompanied by fever and muscle pain.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
immune system in response to a specific foreign
protein or particle called an antigen.



Delayed hypersensitivity reactions—Allergic reactions mediated by T cells that occur hours to days
after exposure.
Granules—Small packets of reactive chemicals
stored within cells.
Histamine—A chemical released by mast cells that
activates pain receptors and causes cells to become
leaky.

Asthma—A lung condition in which the airways
become narrow due to smooth muscle contraction,
causing wheezing, coughing, and shortness of
breath.
Atopic dermatitis—Infection of the skin as a result of
exposure to airborne or food allergens.

Immune hypersensitivity reaction—Allergic reactions that are mediated by mast cells and occur
within minutes of allergen contact.
Mast cells—A type of immune system cell that is
found in the lining of the nasal passages and eyelids,
displays a type of antibody called immunoglobulin
type E (IgE) on its cell surface, and participates in the
allergic response by releasing histamine from intracellular granules.
T cells—Immune system cells or more specifically,
white blood cells, that stimulate cells to create and
release antibodies.

eye). Exposure to cockroach allergens has been associated with the development of asthma. Airborne
allergens from household pets are another common
source of environmental exposure.

Dermatitis may arise from an allergic response (such
as from poison ivy), or exposure to an irritant causing nonimmune damage to skin cells (such as soap,
cold, and chemical agents).

Antigen—A foreign protein to which the body reacts
by making antibodies.



Conjunctivitis—Inflammation of the thin lining of
the eye called the conjunctiva.
Contact dermatitis—Inflammation of the skin as a
result of contact with a substance.

Allergens in food can cause itching and swelling of
the lips and throat, cramps, and diarrhea. When
absorbed into the bloodstream, they may cause
hives (urticaria) or more severe reactions involving
recurrent, non-inflammatory swelling of the skin,
mucous membranes, organs, and brain (angioedema). Some food allergens may cause anaphylaxis,
a potentially life-threatening condition marked by
tissue swelling, airway constriction, and drop in
blood pressure. Allergies to foods such as cow’s
milk, eggs, nuts, fish, and legumes (peanuts and soybeans) are common. Allergies to fruits and vegetables may also occur.
In contact with the skin, allergens can cause reddening, itching, and blistering, called contact dermatitis.
Skin reactions can also occur from allergens introduced through the airways or gastrointestinal tract.
This type of reaction is known as atopic dermatitis.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE



Injection of allergens, from insect bites and stings or
drug administration, can introduce allergens directly
into the circulation, where they may cause systemwide responses (including anaphylaxis), as well as
the local ones of swelling and irritation at the injection site.

People with allergies are not equally sensitive to
all allergens. Some may have severe allergic rhinitis
but no food allergies, for instance, or be extremely
sensitive to nuts but not to any other food. Allergies
may get worse over time. For example, childhood ragweed allergy may progress to year-round dust and
pollen allergy. On the other hand, a person may lose
allergic sensitivity. Infant or childhood atopic dermatitis disappears in almost all people. More commonly,
what seems to be loss of sensitivity is instead a reduced
exposure to allergens or an increased tolerance for the
same level of symptoms.
123

Allergies

KEY TERMS

Allergies

While allergy to specific allergens is not inherited, the
likelihood of developing some type of allergy seems to be,
at least for many people. If neither parent has allergies,
the chances of a child developing allergy is approximately
10-20%; if one parent has allergies, it is 30-50%; and if
both have allergies, it is 40-75%. One source of this
genetic predisposition is in the ability to produce higher
levels of IgE in response to allergens. Those who produce
more IgE will develop a stronger allergic sensitivity.
COMMON ALLERGENS. The most common airborne allergens are the following:


plant pollens



animal fur and dander



body parts from house mites (microscopic creatures
found in all houses)



house dust



mold spores



cigarette smoke



solvents



cleaners
Common food allergens include the following:

The following types of drugs commonly cause
allergic reactions:


penicillin or other antibiotics



flu vaccines



tetanus toxoid vaccine



gamma globulin

Common causes of contact dermatitis include the
following:


poison ivy, oak, and sumac



nickel or nickel alloys



latex

Insects and other arthropods whose bites or stings
typically cause allergy include the following:


bees, wasps, and hornets



mosquitoes



fleas



scabies

Symptoms depend on the specific type of allergic
reaction. Allergic rhinitis is characterized by an itchy,
runny nose, often with a scratchy or irritated throat
due to post-nasal drip. Inflammation of the thin membrane covering the eye (allergic conjunctivitis) causes
redness, irritation, and increased tearing in the eyes.
Asthma causes wheezing, coughing, and shortness of
124

breath. Symptoms of food allergies depend on the
tissues most sensitive to the allergen and whether the
allergen was spread systemically by the circulatory
system. Gastrointestinal symptoms may include swelling and tingling in the lips, tongue, palate or throat;
nausea; cramping; diarrhea; and gas. Contact dermatitis is marked by reddened, itchy, weepy skin blisters,
and an eczema that is slow to heal. It sometimes has a
characteritic man-made pattern, such as a glove
allergy with clear demarkation on the hands, wrist,
and arms where the gloves are worn, or on the earlobes
by wearing earrings.
Whole body or systemic reactions may occur from
any type of allergen, but are more common following
ingestion or injection of an allergen. Skin reactions
include the raised, reddened, and itchy patches called
hives that characteristically blanch with pressure and
resolve within twenty-four hours. A deeper and more
extensive skin reaction, involving more extensive fluid
collection and pain, is called angioedema. This usually
occurs on the extremities, fingers, toes, and parts of the
head, neck, and face. Anaphylaxis is marked by airway
constriction, blood pressure drop, widespread tissue
swelling, heart rhythm abnormalities, and in some
cases, loss of consciousness. Other syptoms may
include, dizziness, weakness, seizures, coughing, flushing, or cramping. The symptoms may begin within five
minutes after exposure to the allergen up to one hour
or more later. Mast cells in the tissues and basophils in
the blood release mediators that give rise to the clinical
symptoms of this IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction. Commonly, this is associated with allergies to
medications, foods, and insect venoms. In some individuals, anaphylaxis can occur with exercise, plasma
exchange, hemodialysis, reaction to insulin, contrast
media used in certain types of medical tests, and rarely
during the administration of local anesthetics.

Diagnosis
Allergies can often be diagnosed by a careful medical history, matching the onset of symptoms to the
exposure to possible allergens. Allergy is suspected if
the symptoms presented are characteristic of an allergic reaction and this occurs repeatedly upon exposure
to the suspected allergen. Allergy tests can be used to
identify potential allergens, but these must be supported by eveidence of allergic responses in the
patient’s clinical history.
Skin tests
Skin tests are performed by administering a tiny
dose of the suspected allergen by pricking, scratching,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Allergen-Specific IgE Measurement
Tests that measure allergen-specific IgE antibodies generally follow a basic method. The allergen is
bound to a solid support, either in the form of a
cellulose sponge, microtiter plate, or paper disk. The
patient’s serum is prepared from a blood sample and is
incubated with the solid phase. If allergen specific IgE
antibodies are present, they will bind to the solid phase
and be retained there when the rest of the serum is
washed away. Next, an labeled antibody against the
IgE is added and will bind to any IgE on the solid
phase. The excess is washed away and the levels of IgE
are determined. The commonly used RAST test (radio
allergo sorbent test) employed radio-labeled Anti-IgE
antibodies. Updated methods now incorporate the use
of enyzme-labeled antibodies in ELISA assays
(enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays).
Total Serum IgE
The total level of IgE in the serum is commonly
measured with a two-site immunometric assay. Some
research indicates that there is a higher level of total
serum IgE in allergic as compared to non-allergic
people. However, this may not always be the case as
there is considerable overlap between the two groups.
This test is useful for the diagnosis of allergic fungal
sinusitis and bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Other
conditions that are not allergic in nature may give
rise to higher IgE levels such as smoking, AIDS, infection with parasites, and IgE myeloma.
Provocation tests
These tests involve the administration of allergen to
elicit an immune response. Provocation tests, most commonly done with airborne allergens, present the allergen
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

directly through the route normally involved. Delayed
allergic contact dermatitis diagnosis involves similar
methods by application of a skin patch with allergen
to induce an allergic skin reaction. Food allergen provocation tests require abstinence from the suspect allergen
for two weeks or more, followed by ingestion of a
measured amount of the test substance administered as
an opaque capsule along with a placebo control.
Provocation tests are not used if anaphylaxis is is a
concern due to the patient’s medical history.
Future diagnostic methods
Attempts have been made for direct measurement
of immune mediators such as histamine, eosinophil
cationic protein (ECP), and mast cell tryptase.
Another, somewhat controversial,test is electrodermal
testing or electro-acupuncture allergy testing. This test
has been used in Europe and is under investigation in
the United States, though not approved by the Food
and Drug Administration. An electric potential is
applied to the skin, the allergen presented, and the
electrical resistance observed for changes. This
method has not been verified.

Treatment
Avoiding allergens is the first line of defense to
reduce the possibility of an allergic attack. It is helpful
to avoid environmental irritants such as tobacco
smoke, perfumes, household cleaning agents, paints,
glues, air fresheners, and potpourri. Nitrogen dioxide
from poorly vented gas stoves, woodburning stoves,
and artificial fireplaces has also been linked to poor
asthma control. Dust mite control is particularly
important in the bedroom areas by use of allergenimpermeable covers on mattress and pillows, frequent
washing of bedding in hot water, and removal of items
that collect dust such as stuffed toys. Mold growth may
be reduced by lowering indoor humidity, repair of
house foundations to reduce indoor leaks and seepage,
and installing exhaust systems to ventilate areas where
steam is generated such as the bathroom or kitchen.
Allergic individuals should avoid pet allergens such as
saliva, body excretions, pelts, urine, or feces. For those
who insist on keeping a pet, restriction of the animal’s
activity to certain areas of the home may be beneficial.
Complete environmental control is often difficult
to accomplish, hence therapuetic interventions may
become necessary. A large number of prescription
and over-the-counter drugs are available for treatment
of immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Most of these
work by decreasing the ability of histamine to provoke
symptoms. Other drugs counteract the effects of
125

Allergies

puncturing or injecting the skin. The allergen is
applied to the skin as an auqeous extract, usually on
the back, forearms, or top of the thighs. Once in the
skin, the allergen may produce a classic immune wheal
and flare response (a skin lesion with a raised, white,
compressible area surrounded by a red flare). The tests
usually begin with prick tests or patch tests that expose
the skin to small amounts of allergen to observe the
response. A positive reaction will occur on the skin
even if the allergen is at levels normally encountered in
food or in the airways. Reactions are usually evaluated
approximately fifteen minutes after exposure.
Intradermal skin tests involved injection of the allergen into the dermis of the skin. These tests are more
sensitive and are used for allergies associated with risk
of death, such as allergies to antibiotics.

Allergies

histamine by stimulating other systems or reducing
immune responses in general.
Antihistamines
Antihistamines block the histamine receptors on
nasal tissue, decreasing the effect of histamine released
by mast cells. They may be used after symptoms appear,
though they may be even more effective when used
preventively, before symptoms appear. Antihistamines
help reduce sneezing, itching, and rhinorrhea. A wide
variety of antihistamines are available.
Older, first generation antihistamines often produce drowsiness as a major side effect, as well as dry
mouth, tachycardia, blurred vision, constipation, and
lower the threshold for seizures. These medications
also have similar effects to a alcohol and care should
be taken when operating motor vehicles, as individuals
may not be aware that they are impaired. Such antihistamines include the following:


diphenhydramine (Benadryl and generics)



chlorpheniramine (Chlor-trimeton and generics)



brompheniramine (Dimetane and generics)



clemastine (Tavist and generics)

Newer antihistamines that do not cause drowsiness or pass the blood-brain barrier are available by
prescription and include the following:


loratidine (Claritin)



cetirizine (Zyrtec)



fexofenadine (Allegra)

Desloratadine (Clarinex) was approved in 2004 in
syrup form for children two years and older for seasonal allergies and for hives of unknown cause in children as young as six months. It is the only nonsedating
antihistamine approved as of 2004 for children as
young as six months.
Hismanal has the potential to cause serious heart
arrhythmias when taken with the antibiotic erythromycin, the antifungal drugs ketoconazole and itraconazole,
or the antimalarial drug quinine. Taking more than the
recommended dose of Hismanal can also cause
arrhythimas. Seldane (terfenadine), the original nondrowsy antihistamine, was voluntarily withdrawn from
the market by its manufacturers in early 1998 because of
this potential and because of the availability of an
equally effective, safer alternative drug, fexofenadine.
Decongestants
Decongestants constrict blood vessels to the
mucosa to counteract the effects of histamine. This
126

decreases the amount of blood in the nasopahryngeal
and sinus mucosa and reduces swelling. Nasal sprays
are available that can be applied directly to the nasal
lining and oral systematic preparations are available.
Decongestants are stimulants and may cause increased
heart rate and blood pressure, headaches, insomnia,
agitation, and difficulty emptying the bladder. Use of
topical decongestants for longer than several days can
cause loss of effectiveness and rebound congestion,
in which nasal passages become more severely swollen
than before treatment.
Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids reduce mucous membrane
inflammation by decreasing the amount of fluid moved
from the vascular spaces into the tissues. These medications reduce the recruitment of inflammatory cells as
well as the synthesis of cytokines. They are available by
prescription. Allergies tend to become worse as the
season progresses because the immune system becomes
sensitized to particular antigens and can produce a
faster, stronger response. Topical corticosteroids are
especially effective at reducing this seasonal sensitization because they work more slowly and last longer
than most other medication types. As a result, they
are best started before allergy season begins. Side
effects are usually mild, but may include headaches,
nosebleeds, and unpleasant taste sensations.
Bronchodilators or metered-dose inhalers (MDI)
Because allergic reactions involving the lungs
cause the airways or bronchial tubes to narrow, as in
asthma, bronchodilators, which cause the smooth muscle lining the airways to open or dilate, can be very
effective. When inhalers are used, it is important that
the patient be educated in the proper use of these
medications. The inhaler should be shaken, and the
patient should breathe out to expel air from the lungs.
The inhaler should be placed at least two fingerbreadths in front of the mouth. The medication should
be aimed at the back of the throat, and the inhaler
activated while breathing in quite slowly 3-4 seconds.
The breath should be held for at least ten seconds, and
then expelled. At least thirty to sixty seconds should
pass before the inhaler is used again. Care should be
taken to properly wash out the mouth and brush the
teeth following use, as residual medication remains in
this area with only a small amount actually reaching
the lungs. Some bronchodilators used to treat acute
asthma attacks include adrenaline, albuterol, Maxair,
Proventil, or other ‘‘adrenoceptor stimulants,’’ most
often administered as aerosols. Successfully managing
asthma and allergies can reduce the use of inhalers.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Anticholinergics
Ipratropium bromide (atrovent) and atropine sulfate are achticholinergic drugs used for the treatment
of asthma. Ipratropium is used for treating asthmatics
in emergency situations with a nebulizer.
Nonsteroidal drugs
MAST CELL STABILIZERS. Cromolyn sodium prevents the release of mast cell granules, thereby preventing the release of histamine and other chemicals
contained in them. It acts as a preventive treatment if it
is begun several weeks before the onset of the allergy
season. It can also be used for year round allergy
prevention. Cromolyn sodium is available as a nasal
spray for allergic rhinitis and in aerosol (a suspension
of particles in gas) form for asthma.
LEUKOTRIENE MODIFIERS. These medications are

useful for individuals with aspirin sensitivity, sinusitis,
polposis, urticaria. Examples include zafirlukast
(Accolate), montelukast (Singulair), and zileuton
(Zyflo). When zileuton is used, care must be taken to
measure liver enzymes.
Immunotherapy
In this form of therapy, allergen is injected into the
skin in increasing doses over a specific period of time.
This may be helpful for patients who do not respond to
medications or avoidance of allergens in the environment. This type of therapy may reduce the need for
medications. A 2004 study recommended that children
who have severe reactions to insect sting receive immunotherapy to protect them against future stings.
Treatment of contact dermatitis
An individual suffering from contact dermatitis
should initially take steps to avoid possible sources of
exposure to the offending agent. Calamine lotion
applied to affected skin can reduce irritation somewhat,
as can cold water compresses. Side effects of topical
agents may include over-drying of the skin. In the case
of acute contact dermatitis, short-term oral corticosteroid therapy may be appropriate. Moderately strong
coricosteroids can also be applied as a wrap for twentyfour hours. Health care workers are especially at risk
for hand eruptions due to glove use.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Treatment of anaphylaxis
The emergency condition of anaphylaxis is treated
with injection of adrenaline, also known as epinephrine. People who are prone to anaphylaxis because
of food or insect allergies often carry an ‘‘Epi-pen’’
containing adrenaline in a hypodermic needle. Other
medications may be given to aid the action of the epipen. Prompt injection can prevent a more serious
reaction from developing. Particular care should be
taken to assess the affected individual’s airway status,
and he or she should be placed in a recumbent pose
and vital signs determined. If a reaction resulted from
insect sting or an injection, a tourniquet may need
to be placed proximal to the area where the agent
penetrated the skin. This should then be released at
intervals of ten minutes at a time, for one to two
minutes duration. If the individual does not respond
to such interventions, then emergency treatment is
appropriate.

Alternative treatment
Any alternative treatment for allergies begins with
finding the cause and then helping the patient to avoid
or eliminate the allergen, although this is not always
possible. As with any alternative therapy, a physician
should be consulted before initiating a new form of
treatment. Education on the use of alternative agents
is critical, as they are still ‘‘drugs’’ even though they
are derived from natural sources. Various categories
of alternative remedies may be helpful in allergy treatment, including:


antihistamines: vitamin C and the bioflavonoid
hesperidin act as natural anithistamines.



decongestants: vitamin C, the homeopathic remedies Ferrum phosphoricum and Kali muriaticum
(used alternately), and the dietary supplement
N-acetylcysteine are believed to have decongestant effects.



mast cell stabilizers: the bioflavonoids quercetin and
hesperidin may help stabilize mast cells.



immunotherapy: the herbs echinacea (Echinacea
spp.) and astragalus or milk-vetch root (Astragalus
membranaceus) may possibly help to strengthen the
immune system.



bronchodilators: the herbal remedies ephedra
(Ephedra sinica, also known as ma huang in traditional Chinese medicine), khellin (Ammi visnaga) and
cramp bark (Viburnum opulus) are believed to help
open the airways.

127

Allergies

This is done through good communication between
the physician and patient, self-management with written action plans, avoiding allergy triggers, and
through the use of preventive medications such as
montelukast.

Allergy tests

Treatment of contact dermatitis
A variety of herbal remedies, either applied topically or taken internally, may possibly assist in the
treatment of contact dermatitis. A poultice (crushed
herbs applied directly to the affected area) made of
jewelweed (Impatiens spp.) or chickweed (Stellaria
media) may soothe the skin. A cream or wash containing calendula (Calendula officinalis), a natural antiseptic and anti-inflammatory agent, may help heal the
rash when applied topically. Homeopathic treatment
may include such remedies as Rhus toxicodendron,
Apis mellifica, or Anacardium taken internally. A
qualified homeopathic practitioner should be consulted to match the symptoms with the correct remedy.
Care should be taken with any agent taken internally.

Prognosis
Allergies can improve over time, although they
often worsen. While anaphylaxis and severe asthma
are life-threatening, other allergic reactions are not.
Learning to recognize and avoid allergy-provoking
situations allows most people with allergies to lead
normal lives.

Prevention
Avoiding allergens is the best means of limiting
allergic reactions. For food allergies, there is no effective
treatment except avoidance. By determining the allergens that are causing reactions, most people can learn to
avoid allergic reactions from food, drugs, and contact
allergens such as poison ivy or latex. The government
will help now, since passing the Food Allergen Labeling
and Consumer Protection Act in 2004. Beginning
January 1, 2006, food manufacturers will be required
to clearly state if a product contains any of the eight
major food allergens that are responsible for more than
90% of allergic reactions to foods. These are milk,
eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, shellfish, wheat, and soy.
Airborne allergens are more difficult to avoid,
although keeping dust and animal dander from collecting in the house may limit exposure. Cromolyn
sodium can prevent mast cell degranulation, thereby
limiting the allergic response.
Immunotherapy, also known as desensitization or
allergy shots, alters the balance of antibody types in
the body, thereby reducing the ability of IgE to cause
allergic reactions. Immunotherapy is preceded by
allergy testing to determine the precise allergens
responsible. Injections involve very small but gradually increasing amounts of allergen, over several weeks
or months, with periodic boosters. Full benefits may
128

take up to several years to achieve and are not seen at
all in about one in five patients. Individuals receiving
all shots will be monitored closely following each shot
because of the small risk of anaphylaxis, a condition
that can result in difficulty breathing and a sharp drop
in blood pressure.
Other drugs, such as leukotriene modifiers, are
used to prevent asthma attacks and in the long-term
management of allergies and asthma.
Resources
BOOKS

Hans-Uwe, Simon, editor. CRC Desk Reference for Allergy
and Asthma. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2000.
Kemp, Stephen F., and Richard Lockey, editors. Diagnostic
Testing of Allergic Disease. New York: Marcel Dekker,
Inc., 2000.
Lieberman, Phil, and Johh Anderson, editors. Allergic
Diseases: Diagnosis and Treatment. 2nd ed. Totowa:
Humana Press, Inc., 2000.
PERIODICALS

‘‘Children With Serious Insect-sting Allergies Should Get
Shots.’’ Drug Week (September 3, 2004): 19.
‘‘FDA Approves Clarinex Syrup for Allergies and Hives in
Children.’’ Biotech Week (September 29, 2004): 617.
‘‘President Bush Signs Bill that Will Benefit Millions With
Food Allergies.’’ Immunotherapy Weekly (September 1,
2004): 50.
‘‘What’s New in: Asthma and Allergic Rhinitis.’’ Pulse
(September 20, 2004): 50.

Richard Robinson
Jill Granger, MS
Teresa G. Odle

I Allergy tests
Definition
Allergy tests indicate a person’s allergic sensitivity
to commonly encountered environmental substances.

Purpose
Allergy is a reaction of the immune system.
Normally, the immune system responds to foreign
microorganisms and particles, like pollen or dust,
by producing specific proteins called antibodies that
are capable of binding to identifying molecules, or
antigens, on the foreign organisms. This reaction
between antibody and antigen sets off a series of
reactions designed to protect the body from infection. Sometimes, this same series of reactions is
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

This patient is being exposed to certain allergens as part of
an allergy test. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by
permission.)

triggered by harmless, everyday substances. This is
the condition known as allergy, and the offending
substance is called an allergen. Common inhaled
allergens include pollen, dust, and insect parts from
tiny house mites. Common food allergens include
nuts, fish, and milk.
Allergic reactions involve a special set of cells
in the immune system known as mast cells. Mast
cells serve as guards in the tissues where the body
meets the outside world: the skin, the mucous
membranes of the eyes and other areas, and the linings of the respiratory and digestive systems. Mast
cells display a special type of antibody, called immunoglobulin type E (IgE), on their surface. Inside,
mast cells store reactive chemicals in small packets,
called granules. When the antibodies encounter allergens, they trigger the release of granules, which spill
out their chemicals onto neighboring cells, including
blood vessels and nerve cells. One of these chemicals,
histamine, binds to the surfaces of these other cells,
through special proteins called histamine receptors.
Interaction of histamine with receptors on blood
vessels causes neighboring cells to become leaky,
leading to the fluid collection, swelling, and increased
redness characteristic of a runny nose and red, irritated eyes. Histamine also stimulates pain receptors,
causing the itchy, scratchy nose, eyes, and throat
common in allergic rhinitis.
The particular allergens to which a person is sensitive can be determined through allergy testing.
Allergy tests may be performed on the skin or using
blood serum in a test tube. During skin tests, potential
allergens are placed on the skin and the reaction
is observed. In radio-allergosorbent allergy testing
(RAST), a patient’s blood serum is combined
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Allergen—A substance that provokes an allergic
response.
Anaphylaxis—Increased sensitivity caused by
previous exposure to an allergen that can result
in blood vessel dilation (swelling) and smooth
muscle contraction. Anaphylaxis can result in
sharp blood pressure drops and difficulty
breathing.
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
immune system in response to a specific foreign
protein or particle called an antigen.
Antigen—A foreign protein to which the body
reacts by making antibodies.
Histamine—A chemical released by mast cells that
activates pain receptors and causes cells to become
leaky.
Mast cells—A type of immune system cell that
is found in the lining of the nasal passages and
eyelids, displays a type of antibody called immunoglobulin type E (IgE) on its cell surface, and participates in the allergic response by releasing
histamine from intracellular granules.

with allergen in a test tube to determine if serum antibodies react with the allergen. Provocation testing
involves direct exposure to a likely allergen, either
through inhalation or ingestion. Positive reactions
from any of these tests may be used to narrow the
candidates for the actual allergen causing the allergy.
Identification of the allergenic substance may
allow the patient to avoid the substance and reduce
allergic reactions. In addition, allergy testing may
be done in those with asthma that is difficult to
manage, eczema, or skin rashes to determine if an
allergy is causing the condition or making it worse.
Allergy tests may also be done before allergen desensitization to ensure the safety of more extensive exposure.
Skin testing is the most common type of allergy test.
There are two forms: percutaneous and intradermal. In
percutaneous or prick testing, allergen solutions are
placed on the skin, and the skin is then pricked with a
needle, allowing the allergen to enter the skin and
become exposed to mast cells. Scratch testing, in which
the skin is scratched instead of punctured, is used less
often. Intradermal testing involves directly injecting
allergen solutions into the skin. In both tests, a reddened,
swollen spot develops at the injection site for each
129

Allergy tests

KEY TERMS

Allergy tests

substance to which the person is sensitive. Skin reactivity
is seen for allergens regardless of whether they usually
affect the skin. In other words, airborne and food allergens cause skin reactions equally well.
The range of allergens used for testing is chosen to
reflect possible sources in the environment and may
include the following:


pollen from a variety of trees, common grasses, and
weeds



mold and fungus spores



house dust



house mites



animal skin cells (dander) and saliva



food extracts



antibiotics



insect venoms

Radio-allergosorbent testing (RAST) is a laboratory test performed when a person may be too sensitive to risk skin testing or when medications or skin
conditions prevent it.
Provocation testing is done to positively identify
suspected allergens after preliminary skin testing.
A purified preparation of the allergen is inhaled or
ingested in increasing concentrations to determine if
it will provoke a response. In 2004, scientists introduced an optical method to continuously measure the
changes in nasal mucosa (lining) changes with an
infrared light to help improve the accuracy of provocation testing. Food testing is much more tedious than
inhalation testing, since full passage through the digestive system may take a day or more.

Precautions
While allergy tests are quite safe for most people,
the possibility of a condition known as anaphylaxis
exists. Anaphylaxis is a potentially dangerous condition that can result in difficulty breathing and a sharp
drop in blood pressure. People with a known history
of anaphylaxis should inform the testing clinician.
Skin tests should never include a substance known to
cause anaphylaxis in the person being tested.
Provocation tests may cause an allergic reaction.
Therefore, treatment medications should be available
following the tests, to be administered, if needed.

Description
In prick testing, a drop of each allergen to be tested
is placed on the skin, usually on the forearm or the back.
130

A close-up of a patient’s arm after allergy testing. (Custom
Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

A typical battery of tests may involve two dozen allergen
drops, including a drop of saline solution that should
not provoke a reaction (negative control) and a drop of
histamine that should provoke a reaction (positive control). A small needle is inserted through the drop, and
used to prick the skin below. A new needle is used for
each prick. The sites are examined over the next 20 minutes for evidence of swelling and redness, indicating a
positive reaction. In some instances, a tracing of the set
of reactions may be made by placing paper over
the tested area. Similarly, in intradermal testing, separate injections are made for each allergen tested.
Observations are made over the next 20 minutes.
In RAST testing, a blood sample is taken for use in
the laboratory, where the antibody- containing serum
is separated from the blood cells. The serum is then
exposed to allergens bound to a solid medium. If a
person has antibodies to a particular allergen, those
antibodies will bind to the solid medium and remain
behind after a rinse. Location of allergen-antibody combinations is done by adding antibody-reactive antibodies, so called anti-antibodies, that are chemically linked
with a radioactive dye. By locating radioactive spots on
the solid medium, the reactive allergens are discovered.
Provocation testing may be performed to identify
airborne or food allergens. Inhalation testing is performed only after a patient’s lung capacity and
response to the medium used to dilute the allergen
has been determined. Once this has been determined,
the patient inhales increasingly concentrated samples
of a particular allergen, followed each time by measurement of the exhalation capacity. Only one allergen
is tested per day. Testing for food allergies is usually
done by removing the suspect food from the diet for
two weeks, followed by eating a single portion of the
suspect food and follow-up monitoring.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Skin testing is preceded by a brief examination of
the skin. The patient should refrain from using antiallergy drugs for at least 48 hours before testing. Prior
to inhalation testing, patients with asthma who can
tolerate it may be asked to stop any asthma medications.
Testing for food allergies requires the person to avoid
all suspect food for at least two weeks before testing.

Gastrointestinal symptoms within 24 hours
following the ingestion of a suspected food allergen
indicates a positive response.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Hampel, U., et al. ‘‘Optical Measurements of Nasal
Swellings.’’ IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering (September 2004): 1673–1680.

Aftercare
Skin testing does not usually require any aftercare.
A generalized redness and swelling may occur in the test
area, but it will usually resolve within a day or two.
Inhalation tests may cause delayed asthma
attacks, even if the antigen administered in the test
initially produced no response. Severe initial reactions
may justify close professional observation for at least
12 hours after testing.

Richard Robinson
Teresa G. Odle

Allogenic transplant see Bone marrow
transplantation
Allopurino see Gout drugs

Risks
Intradermal testing may inadvertently result in
the injection of the allergen into the circulation, with
an increased risk of adverse reactions. Inhalation tests
may provoke an asthma attack. Exposure to new or
unsuspected allergens in any test carries the risk of
anaphylaxis. Because patients are monitored following allergy testing, an anaphylactic reaction is usually
recognized and treated promptly. Occasionally, a
delayed anaphylactic response can occur that will
require immediate care. Proper patient education
regarding how to recognize anaphylaxis is vital.

Normal results
Lack of redness or swelling on a skin test indicates
no allergic response. In an inhalation test, the exhalation capacity should remain unchanged. In a food
challenge, no symptoms should occur.

Abnormal results
Presence of redness or swelling, especially over
5 mm (1/4 inch) in diameter, indicates an allergic
response. This does not mean the substance actually
causes the patient’s symptoms, however, since he or
she may have no regular exposure to the allergen. In
fact, the actual allergen may not have been included in
the test array.
Following allergen inhalation, reduction in exhalation capacity of more than 20%, and for at least 10-20
minutes, indicates a positive reaction to the allergen.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

I Alopecia
Definition
Alopecia simply means hair loss (baldness).

Description
Hair loss occurs for a great many reasons, from
conditions that make people literally pull it out to
complete hair loss caused by the toxicity of cancer
chemotherapy. Some causes are considered natural,
while others signal serious health problems. Some
conditions are confined to the scalp. Others reflect
disease throughout the body. Being plainly visible,
the skin and its components can provide early signs
of disease elsewhere in the body.
Oftentimes, conditions affecting the skin of the
scalp will result in hair loss. The first clue to the specific
cause is the pattern of hair loss, whether it be complete
baldness (alopecia totalis), patchy bald spots, thinning,
or hair loss confined to certain areas. Also a factor is
the condition of the hair and the scalp beneath it.
Sometimes only the hair is affected; sometimes the
skin is visibly diseased as well.

Causes and symptoms


Male pattern baldness (androgenic alopecia) is considered normal in adult males. It is easily recognized
by the distribution of hair loss over the top and front
of the head and by the healthy condition of the scalp.
131

Alopecia

Preparation

Alopecia

KEY TERMS
Athlete’s foot—A fungal infection between the
toes, officially known as tinea pedis.
Autoimmune disease—Certain diseases caused by
the body’s development of an immune reaction to
its own tissues.
Chemotherapy—The treatment of diseases, usually
cancer, with drugs (chemicals).
Hair follicles—Tiny organs in the skin, each one of
which grows a single hair.
Lupus erythematosus—An autoimmune disease that
can damage skin, joints, kidneys, and other organs.
Ringworm—A fungal infection of the skin, usually
known as tinea corporis.
Systemic—Affecting all or most parts of the body.

women as a result of some hairstyles that pull too
tightly on the scalp and harsh chemical treatments
that damage the hair shaft and follicles.
Top of balding male’s head. (Photograph by Kelly A. Quin.
Reproduced by permission.)



Alopecia areata is a hair loss condition of unknown
cause that can be patchy or extend to complete
baldness.



Fungal infections of the scalp usually cause patchy
hair loss. The fungus, similar to the ones that cause
athlete’s foot and ringworm, often glows under ultraviolet light.



Trichotillomania is the name of a mental disorder
that causes a person to pull out his or her own hair.



Complete hair loss is a common result of cancer
chemotherapy, due to the toxicity of the drugs used.



Systemic diseases often affect hair growth either
selectively or by altering the skin of the scalp. One
example is thyroid disorders. Hyperthyroidism
(too much thyroid hormone) causes hair to become
thin and fine. Hypothyroidism (too little thyroid
hormone) thickens both hair and skin.



Several autoimmune diseases (when protective cells
begin to attack self cells within the body) affect the
skin, notably lupus erythemematosus.



In 2004, a report a the annual meeting of the
American Academy of Dermatology said that alopecia was becoming nearly epidemic among black

132

Diagnosis
Dermatologists are skilled in diagnosis by sight
alone. For more obscure diseases, they may have to
resort to a skin biopsy, removing a tiny bit of skin using
a local anesthetic so that it can be examined under a
microscope. Systemic diseases will require a complete
evaluation by a physician, including specific tests to
identify and characterize the problem.

Treatment
Successful treatment of underlying causes is most
likely to restore hair growth, be it the completion of
chemotherapy, effective cure of a scalp fungus, or control of a systemic disease. Two relatively new drugs–
minoxidil (Rogaine) and finasteride (Proscar)–promote
hair growth in a significant minority of patients,
especially those with male pattern baldness and alopecia areata. While both drugs have so far proved to be
quite safe when used for this purpose, minoxidil is a
liquid that is applied to the scalp and finasteride is
the first and only approved treatment in a pill form.
Minoxidil was approved for over-the-counter
sales in 1996. When used continuously for long periods of time, minoxidil produces satisfactory results in
about one-fourth of patients with androgenic alopecia
and as many as half the patients with alopecia areata.
There is also an over-the-counter extra-strength
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Over the past few decades a multitude of hair
replacement methods have been performed by physicians and non-physicians. They range from simply
weaving someone else’s hair in with the remains of
one’s own to surgically transplanting thousands of
hair follicles one at a time.
Hair transplantation is completed by taking tiny
plugs of skin, each containing one to several hairs,
from the back side of the scalp. The bald sections are
then implanted with the plugs. Research completed in
2000 looked at the new technique of hair grafting, and
found that micrografts (one or two hairs transplanted
per follicle) resulted in fewer complications and the
best results.
Another surgical procedure used to treat androgenic alopecia is scalp reduction. By stretching skin,
the hairless scalp can be removed and the area of bald
skin decreased by closing the space with hair-covered
scalp. Hair-bearing skin can also be folded over an
area of bald skin with a technique called a flap.
Stem cell research is generating new hope for
baldness. Scientists know that a part of the hair follicle
called the bulge contains stem cells that can give rise to
new hair and help heal skin wounds. Early research
with mice in 2004 showed promise for identifying the
genes that cause baldness and to identify drugs that
can reverse the process.

Prognosis
The prognosis varies with the cause. It is generally
much easier to lose hair than to regrow it. Even when it
returns, it is often thin and less attractive than the
original.
Resources
PERIODICALS

Cohen, Philip. ‘‘Stem Cells Generate Hair and Hope for the
Bald.’’ New Scientist (March 20, 2004): 17.
Lohr, Elizabeth. ‘‘Alopecia Nearly Epidemic Among Black
Women.’’ Clinical Psychiatry News (March 2004): 96.
Nielsen, Timothy A., and Martin Reichel. ‘‘Alopecia:
Diagnosis and Management.’’ American Family Physician.
OTHER

Androgenetic Alopecia.com. ‘‘How can minoxidil be used to
treat baldness?’’ May1, 2001. <http://androgeneticalopecia.com/baldnesstreatments/minoxidil/
002minoxidilbaldnessusee.shtml>.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Mayo Clinic. ‘‘Alopecia’’ January 26, 2001. [cited May 1,
2001]. <http://www.mayohealth.org>.
WebMD Medical News. ‘‘Hair Today, Gone Tomorrow,
Hair Again’’ 2000. [cited May 1, 2001]. <http://
my.webmd.com/content/article/1728.53923>.

Beth A. Kapes
Teresa G. Odle

I Alpha-fetoprotein test
Definition
The alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test is a blood test
that is performed during pregnancy. This screening
test measures the level of AFP in the mother’s blood
and indicates the probability that the fetus has one
of several serious birth defects. The level of AFP can
also be determined by analyzing a sample of amniotic
fluid. This screening test cannot diagnose a specific
condition; it only indicates increased risk for several
birth defects. Outside pregnancy, the AFP test is used
to detect liver disease, certain cancerous tumors, and
to monitor the progress of cancer treatment.

Purpose
Alpha-fetoprotein is a substance produced by the
liver of a fetus. The exact function of this protein is
unknown. After birth, the infant’s liver stops producing
AFP, and an adult liver contains only trace amounts.
During pregnancy, the fetus excretes AFP in urine and
some of the protein crosses the fetal membranes to
enter the mother’s blood. The level of AFP can then
be determined by analyzing a sample of the mother’s
blood. By analyzing the amount of AFP found in a
blood or amniotic fluid sample, doctors can determine
the probability that the fetus is at risk for certain birth
defects. It is very important that the doctor know
precisely how old the fetus is when the test is performed
since the AFP level changes over the length of the
pregnancy. Alone, AFP screening cannot diagnose a
birth defect. The test is used as an indicator of risk and
then an appropriate line of testing (such as amniocentesis or ultrasound) follows, based on the results.
Abnormally high AFP may indicate that the
fetus has an increased risk of a neural tube defect,
the most common and severe type of disorder
associated with increased AFP. These types of defects
include spinal column defects (spina bifida) and
anencephaly (a severe and usually fatal brain
abnormality). If the tube that becomes the brain
133

Alpha-fetoprotein test

version of minoxidil (5% concentration) approved for
use by men only. The treatment often results in new
hair that is thinner and lighter in color. It is important
to note that new hair stops growing soon after the use
of minoxidil is discontinued.

Alpha-fetoprotein test

KEY TERMS
Amniotic fluid—Fluid within the uterine sac in
which the fetus lives until born.
Fetus—The stage in human development from the
second month of pregnancy until birth.

reappear in liver disease, or tumors of the liver, ovaries, or testicles. The AFP test is used to screen people
at high risk for these conditions. After a cancerous
tumor is removed, an AFP test can monitor the
progress of treatment. Continued high AFP levels
suggest the cancer is growing.

Precautions
and spinal cord does not close correctly during fetal
development, AFP may leak through this abnormal
opening and enter the amniotic fluid. This leakage
creates abnormally high levels of AFP in amniotic
fluid and in maternal blood. If the screening test
indicates abnormally high AFP, ultrasound is used
to diagnose the problem.
Other fetal conditions that can raise AFP levels
above normal include:


cysts at the end of the spine



blockage in the esophagus or intestines



liver disease causing liver cells to die



defects in the abdominal wall



kidney or urinary tract defects or disease



brittle bone disease

Levels may also be high if there is too little fluid in
the amniotic sac around the fetus, more than one
developing fetus, or a pregnancy that is farther along
than estimated.
For unknown reasons, abnormally low AFP may
indicate that the fetus has an increased risk of Down
syndrome. Down syndrome is a condition that includes
mental retardation and a distinctive physical appearance
linked to an abnormality of chromosome 21 (called
trisomy 21). If the screening test indicates an abnormally
low AFP, amniocentesis is used to diagnose the problem.
Abnormally low levels of AFP can also occur when
the fetus has died or when the mother is overweight.
AFP is often part of a ‘‘triple check’’ blood test
that analyzes three substances as risk indicators of
possible birth defects: AFP, estriol, and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). When all three substances
are measured in the mother’s blood, the accuracy of
the test results increases.
In 2004, a new study showed that the risk of an
infant’s death from sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS) increased if levels of AFP were higher during
the second trimester of the mother’s pregnancy.
Although AFP in human blood gradually disappears after birth, it never disappears entirely. It may
134

It is very important that the doctor know precisely
how old the fetus is when the test is performed since
the AFP level considered normal changes over the
length of the pregnancy. Errors in determining the
age of the fetus lead to errors when interpreting
the test results. Since an AFP test is only a screening
tool, more specific tests must follow to make an accurate diagnosis. An abnormal test result does not necessarily mean that the fetus has a birth defect. The test
has a high rate of abnormal results (either high or low)
to prevent missing a fetus that has a serious condition.

Description
The AFP test is usually performed at week 16 of
pregnancy. Blood is drawn from the patient’s
(mother’s) vein, usually on the inside of the elbow.
AFP can also be measured in the sample of amniotic
fluid taken at the time of amniocentesis. Test results
are usually available after about one week.

Preparation
There is no specific physical preparation for the
AFP test.

Aftercare
There is no specific aftercare involved with this
screening test.

Risks
The risks associated with drawing blood are minimal, but may include bleeding from the puncture
site, feeling faint or lightheaded after the blood is
drawn, or blood accumulating under the puncture
site (hematoma).

Normal results
Alpha-fetoprotein is measured in nanograms per
milliliter (ng/mL) and is expressed as a probability.
The probability (1:100, for example) translates into
the chance that the fetus has a defect (a one in 100
chance, for example).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Abnormal results
The doctor will inform the woman of her specific
increased risk as compared to the ‘‘normal’’ risk of a
standard case. If the risk of Down syndrome is greater
than the standard risk for women who are 35 years old
or older (one in 270), amniocentesis is recommended.
Again, the test has a high rate of showing an abnormal
AFP level in order to prevent missing a fetus that has
Down’s syndrome. This screening test only predicts
risk; appropriate diagnostic testing will follow after an
abnormal screening result.
In tumor or liver disease testing, an AFP level
greater than 50 ng/mL is considered abnormal.
Resources

Purpose
These drugs, called alpha blockers for short, are
used for two main purposes: to treat high blood pressure (hypertension) and to treat benign prostatic
hyperplasia (BPH), a condition that affects men and
is characterized by an enlarged prostate gland.
High blood pressure
High blood pressure puts a strain on the heart and
the arteries. Over time, hypertension can damage the
blood vessels to the point of causing stroke, heart failure or kidney failure. People with high blood pressure
may also be at higher risk for heart attacks.
Controlling high blood pressure makes these problems
less likely. Alpha blockers help lower blood pressure
by causing vasodilation, meaning an increase in the
diameter of the blood vessels, which allows blood to
flow more easily.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)

PERIODICALS

Smith, Gordon C.S., et al. ‘‘Second-trimester Maternal
Serum Levels of Alpha-fetoprotein and the Subsequent
Risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome.’’ New England
Journal of Medicine (September 2, 2004): 978.
ORGANIZATIONS

March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275
Mamaroneck Ave., White Plains, NY 10605. (914)
428-7100. resourcecenter@modimes.org. <http://
www.modimes.org>.
National Cancer Institute. Building 31, Room 10A31, 31
Center Drive, MSC 2580, Bethesda, MD 20892-2580.
(800) 422-6237. <http://www.nci.nih.gov>.

This condition particularly affects older men.
Over time, the prostate, a donut-shaped gland
below the bladder, enlarges. When this happens, it
may interfere with the passage of urine from the
bladder out of the body. Men who are diagnosed
with BPH may have to urinate more often. Or they
may feel that they can not completely empty their
bladders. Alpha blockers inhibit the contraction of
prostatic smooth muscle and thus relax muscles in
the prostate and the bladder, allowing urine to flow
more freely.

Description
Adrienne Massel, RN
Teresa G. Odle

Alpha-thalassemia see Thalassemia

Commonly prescribed alpha blockers for hypertension and BPH include doxazosin (Cardura, prazosin (Minipress) and terazosin (Hytrin). Prazosin is also
used in the treatment of heart failure. All are available
only with a physician’s prescription and are sold in
tablet form.

Recommended dosage

I Alpha -adrenergic blockers
1

Definition
Alpha1-adrenergic blockers are drugs that work
by blocking the alpha1-receptors of vascular smooth
muscle, thus preventing the uptake of catecholamines
by the smooth muscle cells. This causes vasodilation
and allows blood to flow more easily.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The recommended dose depends on the patient
and the type of alpha blocker and may change over
the course of treatment. The prescribing physician will
gradually increase the dosage, if necessary. Some
patients may need as much as 15-20 mg per day of
terazosin, 16 mg per day of doxazosin, or as much as
40 mg per day of prazosin, but most people benefit
from lower doses. As the dosage increases, so does the
possibility of unwanted side effects.
135

Alpha1-adrenergic blockers

When testing for cancer or liver diseases, AFP
results are reported as nanograms per milliliter. An
AFP level less than or equal to 50 ng/mL is considered
normal.

Alpha1-adrenergic blockers

KEY TERMS
Adrenergic—Refers to neurons (nerve cells) that use
catecholamines as neurotransmitters at a synapse.
Adrenergic receptor—There are three families of
adrenergic receptors, alpha1, alpha2 and beta, and
each family contains three distinct subtypes. Each of
the nine subtypes are coded by separate genes, and
display specific drug specificities and regulatory
properties.
Alpha blockers—Medications that bind alpha adrenergic receptors and decrease the workload of the
heart and lower blood pressure. They are commonly
used to treat hypertension, peripheral vascular disease, and hyperplasia.
Arteries—Blood vessels that carry oxygenated blood
away from the heart to the cells, tissues, and organs
of the body.
Catecholamines—Family of neurotransmitters containing dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine,
produced and secreted by cells of the adrenal
medulla in the brain. Catecholamines have excitatory effects on smooth muscle cells of the vessels that
supply blood to the skin and mucous membranes
and have inhibitory effects on smooth muscle cells
located in the wall of the gut, the bronchial tree of the
lungs, and the vessels that supply blood to skeletal

Alpha blockers should be taken exactly as directed, even if the medication does not seem to be working at first. It should not be stopped even if symptoms
improve because it needs to be taken regularly to be
effective. Patients should avoid missing any doses, and
should not take larger or more frequent doses to make
up for missed doses.

Precautions
Alpha blockers may lower blood pressure to a
greater extent than desired. This can cause dizziness,
lightheadedness, heart palpitations, and fainting.
Activities such as driving, using machines, or doing
anything else that might be dangerous for 24 hours
after taking the first dose should be avoided. Patients
should be reminded to be especially careful not to
fall when getting up in the middle of the night. The
same precautions are recommended if the dosage
is increased or if the drug has been stopped and
then started again. Anyone whose safety on the job
could be affected by taking alpha blockers should
136

muscle. There are two different main types of receptors for these neurotransmitters, called alpha and beta
adrenergic receptors. The catecholamines are therefore are also known as adrenergic neurotransmitters.
Hyperplasia—The abnormal increase in the number
of normal cells in a given tissue.
Hypertension—Persistently
pressure.

high

arterial

blood

Neurotransmitter—Substance released from neurons
of the peripheral nervous system that travels across
the synaptic clefts (gaps) of other neurons to excite or
inhibit the target cell.
Palpitation—Rapid, forceful, throbbing, or fluttering
heartbeat.
Receptor—A molecular structure in a cell or on the
surface of a cell that allows binding of a specific
substance that causes a specific physiologic response.
Synapse—A connection between nerve cells, by
which nervous excitation is transferred from one
cell to the other.
Vasodilation—The increase in the internal diameter
of a blood vessel that results from relaxation of
smooth muscle within the wall of the vessel thus
causing an increase in blood flow.

inform his or her physician, so that the physician
can take this factor into account when increasing
dosage.
Some people may feel drowsy or less alert when
using these drugs. They should accordingly avoid
driving or performing activities that require full
attention.
People diagnosed with kidney disease or liver disease may also be more sensitive to alpha blockers.
They should inform their physicians about these conditions if alpha blockers are prescribed. Older people
may also be more sensitive and may be more likely to
have unwanted side effects, such as fainting, dizziness,
and lightheadedness.
It should be noted that alpha blockers do not cure
high blood pressure. They simply help to keep the
condition under control. Similarly, these drugs will
not shrink an enlarged prostate gland. Although they
will help relieve the symptoms of prostate enlargement, the prostate may continue to grow, and it eventually may be necessary to have prostate surgery.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Anyone who has had unusual reactions to alpha
blockers in the past should let his or her physician
know before taking the drugs again. The physician
should also be told about any allergies to foods,
dyes, preservatives, or other substances.
The effects of taking alpha blockers during pregnancy are not fully understood. Women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant should inform
their physicians. Breastfeeding mothers who need to
take alpha blockers should also talk to their physicians. These drugs can pass into breast milk and may
affect nursing babies. It may be necessary to stop
breastfeeding while being treated with alpha blockers.

Side effects
The most common side effects are dizziness, drowsiness, tiredness, headache, nervousness, irritability,
stuffy or runny nose, nausea, pain in the arms and legs,
and weakness. These problems usually go away as the
body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical
treatment. If they do not subside or if they interfere with
normal activities, the physician should be informed.
If any of the following side effects occur, the prescribing physician should be notified as soon as possible:


fainting



shortness of breath or difficulty breathing



fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat



swollen feet, ankles, wrists

Other side effects may occur. Anyone who has
unusual symptoms after taking alpha blockers should
contact his or her physician.

Interactions
Doxazosin (Cardura) is not known to interact
with any other drugs. Terazosin (Hytrin) may interact
with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as
ibuprofen (Motrin), and with other blood pressure
drugs, such as enalapril (Vasotec), and verapamil
(Calan,Verelan). Prazosin (Minipress) may interact
with beta adrenergic blocking agents such as propranolol (Inderal) and others, and with verapamil (Calan,
Isoptin.) When drugs interact, the effects of one or
both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects
may be greater.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

I Alport syndrome
Definition
A hereditary disease of the kidneys that primarily
affects men, causing blood in the urine, hearing loss
and eye problems. Eventually, kidney dialysis or transplant may be necessary.

Description
Alport syndrome affects about one in 5,000
Americans, striking men more often and severely
than women. There are several varieties of the syndrome, some occurring in childhood and others not
causing symptoms until men reach their 20s or 30s. All
varieties of the syndrome are characterized by kidney
disease that usually progresses to chronic kidney failure and by uremia (the presence of excessive amounts
of urea and other waste products in the blood).

Causes and symptoms
Alport syndrome in most cases is caused by a
defect in one or more genes located on the X chromosome. It is usually inherited from the mother, who is a
normal carrier. However, in up to 20% of cases there is
no family history of the disorder. In these cases, there
appears to be a spontaneous genetic mutation causing
Alport syndrome.
Blood in the urine (hematuria) is a hallmark of
Alport syndrome. Other symptoms that may appear in
varying combinations include:


protein in the urine (proteinuria)



sensorineural hearing loss



eye problems [involuntary, rhythmic eye movements
(nystagmus), cataracts, or cornea problems]



skin problems



platelet disorders



abnormal white blood cells



smooth muscle tumors

Not all patients with Alport syndrome have hearing problems. In general, those with normal hearing
have less severe cases of Alport syndrome.

Diagnosis
Alport syndrome is diagnosed with a medical evaluation and family history, together with a kidney
biopsy that can detect changes in the kidney typical of
137

Alport syndrome

Alpha blockers may lower blood counts. Patients
may need to have their blood checked regularly while
taking this medicine.

Alport syndrome

KEY TERMS
Albumin—A protein that is important in maintaining blood volume. Low albumin levels is one sign
of Alport syndrome.
Dialysis—A technique of removing waste material
from the blood. It is used with patients whose kidneys have stopped functioning and can no longer
cleanse the blood on their own.
Diuretic—A drug that increases the amount of
urine a person produces.
Hematuria—Blood in the urine, Hematuria is a
hallmark of Alport syndrome.
Pulmonary edema—Excess fluid in the air spaces of
the lungs.
Uremia—The presence of excessive amounts of
urea and other waste products in the blood.

the condition. Urinalysis may reveal blood or protein in
the urine. Blood tests can reveal a low platelet level.
In addition, tests for the Alport gene are now
available. Although testing is fairly expensive, it is
covered by many types of health insurance. DNA
tests can diagnose affected children even before birth,
and genetic linkage tests tracing all family members at
risk for Alport syndrome are also available.

The treatment for chronic kidney failure is dialysis
or a kidney transplant.

Prognosis
Women with this condition can lead a normal life,
although they may have slight hearing loss. An
affected woman may notice blood in her urine only
when under stress or pregnant.
Men generally have a much more serious problem
with the disease. Most will experience kidney disease
in their 20s or 30s, which may eventually require dialysis or transplantation, and many develop significant
hearing loss. Men with Alport syndrome often die of
complications by middle age.

Prevention
Alport syndrome is a genetic disease and prevention efforts are aimed at providing affected individuals
and their families with information concerning the
genetic mechanisms responsible for the disease. Since
it is possible to determine if a woman is a carrier, or if
an unborn child has the condition, genetic counseling
can provide helpful information and support for the
decisions that affected individuals and their families
may have to make.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS

Treatment
There is no specific treatment that can ‘‘cure’’
Alport syndrome. Instead, care is aimed at easing the
problems related to kidney failure, such as the presence
of too many waste products in the blood (uremia).
To control kidney inflammation (nephritis),
patients should:


restrict fluids



control high blood pressure



manage pulmonary edema



control high blood levels of potassium

Rarely patients with Alport syndrome may develop
nephrotic syndrome, a group of symptoms including
too much protein in the urine, low albumin levels, and
swelling. To ease these symptoms, patients should:


drink less



eat a salt-free diet



use diuretics



have albumin transfusions

138

American Association of Kidney Patients. 100 S. Ashley Dr.,
#280, Tampa, FL 33602. (800) 749-2257. <http://
www.aakp.org>.
American Kidney Fund (AKF). Suite 1010, 6110 Executive
Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852. (800) 638-8299.
<http://216.248.130.102/Default.htm>.
National Kidney and Urologic Disease Information
Clearinghouse. 3 Information Way, Bethesda, MD
20892. (301) 654-4415. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St., New York,
NY 10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
National Organization for Rare Diseases. P.O. Box 8923,
Fairfield, CT 06812. (213) 745-6518. <http://
www.w2.com>.
OTHER

Alport Syndrome Home Page. <http://www.cc.utah.edu/
~cla6202/ASHP.htm>.
‘‘Alport Syndrome.’’ Pediatric Database Home Page.
<http://www.icondata.com/health/pedbase/files/
ALPORTSY.HTM>.
The Hereditary Nephritis Foundation (HNF) Home Page.
<http://www.cc.utah.edu/~cla6202/HNF.htm>.

Carol A. Turkington
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

ALS see Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Alteplase see Thrombolytic therapy

KEY TERMS
Cerebral—Pertaining to the brain.
Edema—Accumulation of excess fluid in the tissues
of the body.
Hypoxemia—Insufficient oxygenation of the blood.

I Altitude sickness
Definition
Altitude sickness is a general term encompassing a
spectrum of disorders that occur at higher altitudes.
Since the severity of symptoms varies with altitude, it
is important to understand the range of the different
altitudes that may be involved. High altitude is defined
as height greater than 8,000 feet (2,438m); medium
altitude is defined as height between 5,000 and 8,000
feet (1,524-2,438m); and extreme altitude is defined as
height greater than 19,000 feet (5,791 m). The majority
of healthy individuals suffer from altitude sickness when
they reach very high altitudes. In addition, about 20%
of people ascending above 9,000 feet (2,743m) in one
day will develop altitude sickness. Children under six
years and women in the premenstrual part of their cycles
may be more vulnerable. Individuals with preexisting
medical conditions–even a minor respiratory infection–
may become sick at more moderate altitudes.

Description
There are three major clinical syndromes that fall
under the heading of altitude sickness: acute mountain
sickness (AMS), high-altitude pulmonary edema
(HAPE), and high-altitude cerebral edema (HACE).
These syndromes are not separate, individual syndromes as much as they are a continuum of severity,
all resulting from a decrease in oxygen in the air. AMS
is the mildest, and the other two represent severe, lifethreatening forms of altitude sickness.
Altitude sickness occurs because the partial pressure of oxygen decreases with altitude. (Partial pressure is a term applied to gases that is similar to the way
the term concentration is applied to liquid solutions.)
For instance, at 18,000 feet (5,486 m) the partial pressure of oxygen drops to one-half its value at sea level
and, therefore, there is a substantially lower amount of
oxygen available for the individual to inhale. This is
known as hypoxia. Furthermore, since there is less
oxygen to inhale, less oxygen reaches the blood. This
is known as hypoxemia. These two conditions are the
major factors that form the basis for all the medical
problems associated with altitude sickness.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Hypoxia—A deficiency in the amount of oxygen
required for effective ventilation.
Pulmonary—Pertaining to the lungs.

As a person becomes hypoxemic, his natural
response is to breathe more rapidly (hyperventilate).
This is the body’s attempt to bring in more oxygen at
a rapid rate. This attempt at alleviating the effects of the
hypoxia at higher altitudes is known as acclimatization,
and it occurs during the first few days. Acclimatization
is a response that occurs in individuals who travel from
lower to higher altitudes. There are groups of people
who have lived at high altitudes (for example, in the
Himalayan and Andes mountains) for generations, and
they are simply accustomed to living at such altitudes,
perhaps through a genetic ability.

Causes and symptoms
Acute mountain sickness (AMS) is a mild form of
altitude sickness that results from ascent to altitudes
higher greater than 8,000 feet (2,438m)–even 6,500 feet
(1,981 m) in some susceptible individuals. Although
hypoxia is associated with the development of AMS,
the exact mechanism by which this condition develops
has yet to be confirmed. It is important to realize that
some individuals acclimatize to higher altitudes more
efficiently than others. As a result, under similar conditions some will suffer from AMS while others will not.
At present, the susceptibility of otherwise healthy individuals to contracting AMS cannot be accurately predicted. Of those who do suffer from AMS, the condition
tends to be most severe on the second or third day after
reaching the high altitude, and it usually abates after
three to five days if they remain at the same
altitude. However, it can recur if the individuals travel
to an even higher altitude. Symptoms usually appear a
few hours to a few days following ascent, and they
include dizziness, headache, shortness of breath, nausea,
vomiting, loss of appetite, and insomnia.
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) is a lifethreatening condition that afflicts a small percentage
of those who suffer from AMS. In this condition, fluid
leaks from within the pulmonary blood vessels into the
lung tissue. As this fluid begins to accumulate within
139

Altitude sickness

Alprazolam see Benzodiazepines

Alzheimer’s disease

the lung tissue (pulmonary edema), the individual
begins to become more and more short of breath.
HAPE is known to afflict all types of individuals,
regardless of their level of physical fitness.
Typically, the individual who suffers from HAPE
ascends quickly to a high altitude and almost immediately develops shortness of breath, a rapid heart
rate, a cough productive of a large amount of sometimes bloody sputum, and a rapid rate of breathing.
If no medical assistance is provided by this point,
the patient goes into a coma and dies within a few
hours.
High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE), the rarest
and most severe form of altitude sickness, involves
cerebral edema, and its mechanism of development is
also poorly understood. The symptoms often begin
with those of AMS, but neurologic symptoms such
as an altered level of consciousness, speech abnormalities, severe headache, loss of coordination, hallucinations, and even seizures. If no intervention is
implemented, death is the result.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis for altitude sickness may be made
from the observation of the individual’s symptoms
during travel to higher altitudes.

Prevention
When individuals ascend from sea level, it is recommended that they spend at least one night at
an intermediate altitude prior to ascending to higher
elevations. In general, climbers should take at least two
days to go from sea level to 8,000 feet (2,438m). After
reaching that point, healthy climbers should generally
allow one day for each additional 2,000 feet (610m), and
one day of rest should be taken every two or three days.
Should mild symptoms begin to surface, further ascent
should be avoided. If the symptoms are severe, the individual should return to a lower altitude. Some reports
indicate that acetazolamide (a diuretic) may be taken
before ascent as a preventative measure for AMS.
Paying attention to diet can also help prevent altitude sickness. Water loss is a problem at higher altitudes, so climbers should drink ample water (enough to
produce copious amounts of relatively light-colored or
clear urine). Alcohol and large amounts of salt should
be avoided. Eating frequent small, high-carbohydrate
snacks (for example, fruits, jams and starchy foods)
can help, especially in the first few days of climbing.
Resources
BOOKS

Crystal, R. G., et al., editors. The Lung: Scientific
Foundations. Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1997.

Treatment
Mild AMS requires no treatment other than an
aspirin or ibuprofen for headache, and avoidance of
further ascent. Narcotics should be avoided because
they may blunt the respiratory response, making
it even more difficult for the person to breathe deeply
and rapidly enough to compensate for the lower levels
of oxygen in the environment. Oxygen may also be
used to alleviate symptoms of mild AMS.
As for HAPE and HACE, the most important
course of action is descent to a lower altitude as soon
as possible. Even a 1,000-2,000-foot (305-610 m) descent can dramatically improve one’s symptoms. If
descent is not possible, oxygen therapy should be
started. In addition, dexamethasone (a steroid) has
been suggested in order to reduce cerebral edema.

Kapil Gupta, MD

Aluminum hydroxide see Antacids

I Alzheimer’s disease
Definition
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form
of dementia, a neurologic disease characterized by loss
of mental ability severe enough to interfere with normal
activities of daily living, lasting at least six months, and
not present from birth. AD usually occurs in old age,
and is marked by a decline in cognitive functions such as
remembering, reasoning, and planning.

Prognosis
The prognosis for mild AMS is good, if appropriate measures are taken. As for HAPE and HACE,
the prognosis depends upon the rapidity and distance
of descent and the availability of medical intervention.
Descent often leads to improvement of symptoms,
however, recovery times vary among individuals.
140

Description
A person with AD usually has a gradual decline in
mental functions, often beginning with slight memory
loss, followed by losses in the ability to maintain
employment, to plan and execute familiar tasks, and to
reason and exercise judgment. Communication ability,
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

The cost of caring for a person with AD is considerable. The annual cost of caring for one AD
patient in 1998 was estimated as about $18,400 for a
patient with mild AD, $30,100 for a patient with moderate AD, and $36,100 for a patient with severe AD.
The annual direct and indirect costs of caring for AD
patients in the United States was estimated to be as
much as $100 billion. Slightly more than half of people
with AD are cared for at home, while the remainder
are cared for in a variety of health care institutions.

Causes and symptoms
Causes
The cause or causes of Alzheimer’s disease are largely unknown, though some forms have genetic links.
Some strong leads have been found through recent
research, however, and these have given some theoretical support to several new experimental treatments.

A brain segment affected by Alzheimer’s disease on the right
compared with a healthy brain segment (left). The diseased
brain appears shrunken, and the fissures are noticeably
larger. (Simon Fraser/MRC Unit, Newcastle General Hospital/
Science Photo Library. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by
permission.)

mood, and personality also may be affected. Most
people who have AD die within eight years of their
diagnosis, although the interval may be as short as one
year or as long as 20 years. AD is the fourth leading
cause of death in adults after heart disease, cancer, and
stroke.
Between two and four million Americans have
AD; that number is expected to grow to as many as
14 million by the middle of the 21st century as the
population ages. While a small number of people in
their 40s and 50s develop the disease (called earlyonset AD), AD predominantly affects the elderly.
AD affects about 3% of all people between ages 65
and 74, about 19% of those between 75 and 84, and
about 47% of those over 85. Slightly more women
than men are affected with AD, but this may be
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

At first AD destroys neurons (nerve cells) in parts
of the brain that control memory, including the
hippocampus, which is a structure deep in the deep
that controls short-term memory. As these neurons
in the hippocampus stop functioning, the person’s
short-term memory fails, and the ability to perform
familiar tasks decreases. Later AD affects the cerebral
cortex, particularly the areas responsible for language
and reasoning. Many language skills are lost and the
ability to make judgments is affected. Personality
changes occur, which may include emotional outbursts, wandering, and agitation. The severity of
these changes increases with disease progression.
Eventually many other areas of the brain become
involved, the brain regions affected atrophy (shrink
and lose function), and the person with AD becomes
bedridden, incontinent, helpless, and non-responsive.
Autopsy of a person with AD shows that the
regions of the brain affected by the disease become
clogged with two abnormal structures, called neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques. Neurofibrillary
tangles are twisted masses of protein fibers inside nerve
cells, or neurons. In AD, tau proteins, which normally
help bind and stabilize parts of neurons, are changed
chemically, become twisted and tangled, and no longer
can stabilize the neurons. Amyloid plaques consist of
insoluble deposits of beta-amyloid, (a protein fragment
from a larger protein called amyloid precursor protein
(APP), mixed with parts of neurons and non-nerve
cells. Plaques are found in the spaces between the
nerve cells of the brain. While it is not clear exactly
141

Alzheimer’s disease

because women tend to live longer, leaving a higher
proportion of women in the most affected age groups.

Alzheimer’s disease
Diseased tissue from the brain of an Alzheimer’s patient showing senile plaques within the brain’s gray matter. (Photograph by
Cecil Fox, Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

KEY TERMS
Acetylcholine—One of the substances in the body
that helps transmit nerve impulses.
Dementia—Impaired intellectual function that
interferes with normal social and work activities.
Ginkgo—An herb from the Ginkgo biloba tree that
some alternative practitioners recommend for the
prevention and treatment of AD.
Neurofibrillary tangle—Twisted masses of protein
inside nerve cells that develop in the brains of
people with AD.
Senile plaque—Structures composed of parts of
neurons surrounding brain proteins called betaamyloid deposits found in the brains of people
with AD.

how these structures cause problems, many researchers
believe that their formation is responsible for the mental changes of AD, presumably by interfering with the
normal communication between neurons in the brain
and later leading to the death of neurons. By 2000,
three drugs for the treatment of AD symptoms were
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). They act by increasing the level of chemical
signaling molecules in the brain, known as neurotransmitters, to make up for this decreased communication
ability. All act by inhibiting the activity of acetylcholinesterase, which is an enzyme that breaks down
acetylcholine, an important neurotransmitter released
by neurons that is necessary for cognitive function.
These drugs modestly increase cognition and improve
one’s ability to perform normal activities of daily living.
142

Exactly what triggers the formation of plaques
and tangles and the development of AD is unknown.
AD likely results from many interrelated factors,
including genetic, environmental, and others not yet
identified. Two types of AD exist: familial AD (FAD),
which is a rare autosomal dominant inherited disease,
and sporadic AD, with no obvious inheritance pattern. AD also is described in terms of age at onset, with
early onset AD occurring in people younger than 65,
and late-onset occurring in those 65 and older. Early
onset AD comprises about 5-10 % of AD cases and
affects people aged 30 to 60. Some cases of early onset
AD are inherited and are common in some families.
Early-onset AD often progresses faster than the more
common late-onset type.
All cases of FAD, which is relatively uncommon,
that have been identified to date are the early onset
type. As many as 50% of FAD cases are known to
be caused by three genes located on three different
chromosomes. Some families have mutations in the
APP gene located on chromosome 21, which causes
the production of abnormal APP protein. Others
have mutations in a gene called presenilin 1 located
on chromosome 14, which causes the production of
abnormal presenilin 1 protein, and others have mutations in a similar gene called presenilin 2 located
on chromosome 1, which causes production of abnormal presenilin 2. Presenilin 1 may be one of the
enzymes that clips APP into beta-amyloid; it also
may be important in the synaptic connections between
brain cells.
There is no evidence that the mutated genes that
cause early onset FAD also cause late onset AD, but
genetics appears to play a role in this more common
form of AD. Discovered by researchers at Duke
University in the early 1990s, potentially the most
important genetic link to AD was on chromosome 19.
A gene on this chromosome, called APOE (apolipoprotein E), codes for a protein involved in transporting
lipids into neurons. APOE occurs in at least three forms
(alleles), called APOE e2, APOE e3, and APOE e4.
Each person inherits one APOE from each parent, and
therefore can either have one copy of two different
forms, or two copies of one. The relatively rare APOE
e2 appears to protect some people from AD, as it seems
to be associated with a lower risk of AD and a later age
of onset if AD develops. APOE e3 is the most common
version found in the general population, and only
appears to have a neutral role in AD. However, APOE
e4 appears to increase the risk of developing late onset
AD with the inheritance of one or two copies of APOE
e4. Compared to those without APOE e4, people with
one copy are about three times as likely to develop lateGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Other non-genetic factors have been studied in
relation to the causes of AD. Inflammation of the
brain may play a role in development of AD, and use
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
were once thought to reduce the risk of developing
AD. Other agents once thought to reduce chances of
dementia are now thought to increase its risk. In 2002,
hormone replacement therapy (HRT), which combines
estrogen and progestogen, was found to double the
risk of developing dementia in postmenopausal
women. Highly reactive molecular fragments called
free radicals damage cells of all kinds, especially
brain cells, which have smaller supplies of protective
antioxidants thought to protect against free radical
damage. Vitamin E is one such antioxidant, and its
use in AD may be of possible theoretical benefit.
While the ultimate cause or causes of Alzheimer’s
disease still are unknown, there are several risk factors
that increase a person’s likelihood of developing the
disease. The most significant one is, of course, age;
older people develop AD at much higher rates than
younger ones. There is some evidence that strokes and
AD may be linked, with small strokes that go undetected clinically contributing to the injury of neurons.
A 2003 Dutch study reported that symptomless, unnoticed strokes could double the risk of AD and other
dementias. Blood cholesterol levels also may be
important. Scientists have shown that high blood
cholesterol levels in special breeds of genetically
engineered (transgenic) mice may increase the rate of
plaque deposition. There are also parallels between
AD and other progressive neurodegenerative disorders that cause dementia, including prion diseases,
Parkinson’s disease, and Huntington’s disease.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Numerous epidemiological studies of populations
also are being conducted to learn more about whether
and to what extent early life events, socioeconomic
factors, and ethnicity have an impact on the development of AD. For example, a 2003 report showed that
the more formal education a person has, the better his
or her memory is, despite presence of AD. Other studies have related education level or participation in
leisure activities such as playing cards or doing crossword puzzles to delayed onset of AD.
Many environmental factors have been suspected
of contributing to AD, but epidemiological population studies have not borne out these links. Among
these have been pollutants in drinking water, aluminum from commercial products, and metal dental fillings. To date, none of these factors has been shown to
cause AD or increase its likelihood. Further research
may yet turn up links to other environmental factors.
Symptoms
The symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease begin gradually, usually with memory lapses. Occasional memory lapses are of course common to everyone, and do
not by themselves signify any change in cognitive
function. The person with AD may begin with only
the routine sort of memory lapse — forgetting where
the car keys are — but progress to more profound or
disturbing losses, such as forgetting that he or she can
even drive a car. Becoming lost or disoriented on a walk
around the neighborhood becomes more likely as the
disease progresses. A person with AD may forget the
names of family members, or forget what was said at
the beginning of a sentence by the time he hears the end.
As AD progresses, other symptoms appear,
including inability to perform routine tasks, loss of
judgment, and personality or behavior changes.
Some people with AD have trouble sleeping and may
suffer from confusion or agitation in the evening
(‘‘sunsetting’’ or Sundowner’s Syndrome). In some
cases, people with AD repeat the same ideas, movements, words, or thoughts. In the final stages people
may have severe problems with eating, communicating, and controlling their bladder and bowel functions.
The Alzheimer’s Association has developed a list
of 10 warning signs of AD. A person with several of
these symptoms should see a physician for a thorough
evaluation:


memory loss that affects job skills



difficulty performing familiar tasks



problems with language



disorientation of time and place
143

Alzheimer’s disease

onset AD, and those with two copies are almost four
times as likely to do so. Having APOE e4 also can lower
the age of onset by as much as 17 years. However,
APOE e4 only increases the risk of developing AD
and does not cause it, as not everyone with APOE e4
develops AD, and people without it can still have the
disease. Why APOE e4 increases the chances of developing AD is not known with certainty. However, one
theory is that APOE e4 facilitates beta-amyloid buildup
in plaques, thus contributing to the lowering of the age
of onset of AD; other theories involve interactions with
cholesterol levels and effects on nerve cell death independent of its effects on plaque buildup. In 2000, four
new AD-related regions in the human genome were
identified, where one out of several hundred genes in
each of these regions may be a risk factor gene for AD.
These genes, which are not yet identified, appear to
make a contribution to the risk of developing lateonset AD that is at least as important as APOE e4.

Alzheimer’s disease



poor or decreased judgment



problems with abstract thinking



misplacing things



changes in mood or behavior



changes in personality



loss of initiative

Other types of dementia, including some that are
reversible, can cause similar symptoms. It is important for the person with these symptoms to be evaluated by a professional who can weigh the possibility
that his or her symptoms may have another cause.
Approximately 20% of those originally suspected of
having AD turn out to have some other disorder;
about half of these cases are treatable.

Diagnosis
Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease is complex, and
may require office visits to several different specialists
over several months before a diagnosis can be made.
While a confident provisional diagnosis may be made
in most cases after thorough testing, AD cannot be
diagnosed definitively until autopsy examination of
the brain for plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
The diagnosis of AD begins with a thorough
physical exam and complete medical history. Except
in the disease’s earliest stages, accurate history from
family members or caregivers is essential. Since there
are both prescription and over-the-counter drugs
that can cause the same mental changes as AD, a
careful review of the patient’s drug, medicine, and
alcohol use is important. AD-like symptoms also
can be provoked by other medical conditions, including tumors, infection, and dementia caused by mild
strokes (multi-infarct dementia). These possibilities
must be ruled out as well through appropriate blood
and urine tests, brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), positron emission tomography (PET) or single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
scans, tests of the brain’s electrical activity (electroencephalographs or EEGs), or other tests. Several
types of oral and written tests are used to aid in the
AD diagnosis and to follow its progression, including
tests of mental status, functional abilities, memory,
and concentration. Still, the neurologic exam is
normal in most patients in early stages.
One of the most important parts of the diagnostic
process is to evaluate the patient for depression and
delirium, since each of these can be present with AD, or
may be mistaken for it. (Delirium involves a decreased
consciousness or awareness of one’s environment.)
144

Depression and memory loss both are common
in the elderly, and the combination of the often can
be mistaken for AD. On the other hand, depression
can be a risk factor for AD. A 2003 study showed that
a history of depressive symptoms can be associated
with nearly twice the risk of eventually developing
AD. Depression can be treated with drugs, although
some antidepressants can worsen dementia if it is
present, further complicating both diagnosis and
treatment.
An early and accurate diagnosis of AD is important in developing strategies for managing symptoms
and for helping patients and their families planning
for the future and pursuing care options while the
patient can still take part in the decision-making
process.
A genetic test for the APOE e4 gene is available,
but is not used for diagnosis, since possessing even two
copies does not ensure that a person will develop AD.
In addition, access to genetic information could affect
the insurability of a patient if disclosed, and also affect
employment status and legal rights.

Treatment
Alzheimer’s disease is presently incurable. Recent
reports show that prompt intervention can slow decline
from AD. The use of medications mentioned below as
early as possible in the course of AD can help people
with the disease maintain independent function as long
as possible. The remaining treatment for a person with
AD is good nursing care, providing both physical and
emotional support for a person who is gradually able to
do less and less for himself, and whose behavior is
becoming more and more erratic. Modifications of the
home to increase safety and security often are necessary. The caregiver also needs support to prevent anger,
despair, and burnout from becoming overwhelming.
Becoming familiar with the issues likely to lie ahead,
and considering the appropriate financial and legal
issues early on, can help both the patient and family
cope with the difficult process of the disease. Regular
medical care by a practitioner with a non-defeatist
attitude toward AD is important so that illnesses such
as urinary or respiratory infections can be diagnosed
and treated properly, rather than being incorrectly
attributed to the inevitable decline seen in AD.
People with AD often are depressed or anxious,
and may suffer from sleeplessness, poor nutrition, and
general poor health. Each of these conditions is treatable to some degree. It is important for the person
with AD to eat well and continue to exercise.
Professional advice from a nutritionist may be useful
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Drugs
As of 2003, four drugs—tacrine (Cognex), donepezil hydrochloride (Aricept), and rivastigmine
(Exelon)—have been approved by the FDA for its
treatment. Tacrine has been shown to be effective for
improving memory skills, but only in patients with
mild-to-moderate AD, and even then in less than half
of those who take it. Its beneficial effects are usually
mild and temporary, but it may delay the need for
nursing home admission. The most significant side
effect is an increase in a liver enzyme known as alanine
aminotransferase, or ALT. Patients taking tacrine
must have a weekly blood test to monitor their ALT
levels. Other frequent side effects include nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, indigestion, and
skin rash. The cost of tacrine was about $125 per
month in early 1998, with additional costs for the
weekly blood monitoring. Despite its high cost, tacrine
appears to be cost-effective for those who respond to
it, since it may decrease the number of months a
patient needs nursing care. Donepezil is the drug
most commonly used to treat mild to moderate symptoms of AD, although it only helps some patients for
periods of time ranging from months to about two
years. Donepezil has two advantages over tacrine: it
has fewer side effects, and it can be given once daily
rather than three times daily. Donepezil does not
appear to affect liver enzymes, and therefore does
not require weekly blood tests. The frequency of
abdominal side effects is also lower. The monthly
cost is approximately the same. Rivastigmine,
approved for use in April of 2000, has been shown to
improve the ability of patients to carry out daily activities, such as eating and dressing, decrease behavioral
symptoms such as delusions and agitation, and improve
cognitive functions such as thinking, memory, and
speaking. The cost is similar to those of the other
two drugs. However, none of these three drugs stops
or reverses the progression of AD. Galantamine
(Reminyl) works in the early and moderates stages
of AD. It has fewer side effects than other drugs,
with the exception of donepezil and must be taken
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

twice a day. Three other drugs were being tested for
AD treatment in mid-2003.
Estrogen, the female sex hormone, is widely prescribed for post-menopausal women to prevent osteoporosis. Studies once showed that estrogen was
beneficial to women with AD, but in 2003, a large
clinical trial called the Women’s Health Initiative
showed dementia among other negative effects of
combined estrogen therapy.
Preliminary studies once suggested a reduced risk
for developing AD in elderly people who regularly used
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
including aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen, although
not acetaminophen. However, an important study
published in 2003 showed that NSAIDs were not effective in preventing or slowing the progression of AD.
The study authors recommended that people stop
taking NSAIDs to slow dementia.
Antioxidants, which act to inhibit and protect
against oxidative damage caused by free radicals, have
been shown to inhibit toxic effects of beta-amyloid in
tissue culture. Therefore, research is being conducted
to see whether antioxidants may delay or prevent AD.
Another antioxidant, vitamin E, is also thought
to delay AD onset. Hoever, it is not yet clear whether
this is due to the specific action of vitamin E on brain
cells, or to an increase in the overall health of those
taking it.
Drugs such as antidepressants, anti-psychotics,
and sedatives are used to treat the behavioral symptoms (agitation, aggression, wandering, and sleep disorders) of AD. Research is being conducted to search
for better treatments, including non-drug approaches
for AD patients.
Nursing care and safety
The person with Alzheimer’s disease will gradually lose the ability to dress, groom, feed, bathe, or use
the toilet by himself; in the later stages of the disease,
he may be unable to move or speak. In addition, the
person’s behavior becomes increasingly erratic. A
tendency to wander may make it difficult to leave
him unattended for even a few minutes and make
even the home a potentially dangerous place. In
addition, some people with AD may exhibit inappropriate sexual behaviors.
The nursing care required for a person with AD is
well within the abilities of most people to learn. The
difficulty for many caregivers comes in the constant
but unpredictable nature of the demands put on them.
In addition, the personality changes undergone by a
145

Alzheimer’s disease

to provide healthy, easy-to-prepare meals. Finger
foods may be preferable to those requiring utensils to
be eaten. Regular exercise (supervised if necessary for
safety) promotes overall health. A calm, structured
environment with simple orientation aids (such as
calendars and clocks) may reduce anxiety and increase
safety. Other psychiatric symptoms, such as depression, anxiety, hallucinations (seeing or hearing things
that aren’t there), and delusions (false beliefs) may be
treated with drugs if necessary.

Alzheimer’s disease

person with AD can be heartbreaking for family members as a loved one deteriorates, seeming to become a
different person. Not all people with AD develop
negative behaviors. Some become quite gentle, and
spend increasing amounts of time in dreamlike states.
A loss of good grooming may be one of the early
symptoms of AD. Mismatched clothing, unkempt hair,
and decreased interest in personal hygiene become
more common. Caregivers, especially spouses, may
find these changes socially embarrassing and difficult
to cope with. The caregiver usually will need to spend
increasing amounts of time on grooming to compensate
for the loss of attention from the patient, although
some adjustment of expectations (while maintaining
cleanliness) is often needed as the disease progresses.
Proper nutrition is important for a person with
AD, and may require assisted feeding early on, to
make sure the person is taking in enough nutrients.
Later on, as movement and swallowing become difficult, a feeding tube may be placed into the stomach
through the abdominal wall. A feeding tube requires
more attention, but is generally easy to care for if the
patient is not resistant to its use.
For many caregivers, incontinence becomes the
most difficult problem to deal with at home, and is a
principal reason for pursuing nursing home care. In
the early stages, limiting fluid intake and increasing
the frequency of toileting can help. Careful attention
to hygiene is important to prevent skin irritation and
infection from soiled clothing.
Persons with dementia must deal with six basic
safety concerns: injury from falls, injury from ingesting dangerous substances, leaving the home and getting lost, injury to self or others from sharp objects,
fire or burns, and the inability to respond rapidly to
crisis situations. In all cases, a person diagnosed with
AD should no longer be allowed to drive, because of
the increased potential for accidents and the increased
likelihood of wandering very far from home while
disoriented. In the home, simple measures such as
grab bars in the bathroom, bed rails on the bed, and
easily negotiable passageways can greatly increase
safety. Electrical appliances should be unplugged and
put away when not in use, and matches, lighters, knives, or weapons should be stored safely out of reach.
The hot water heater temperature may be set lower
to prevent accidental scalding. A list of emergency
numbers, including the poison control center and the
hospital emergency room, should be posted by the
phone. As the disease progresses, caregivers need to
periodically reevaluate the physical safety of the home
and introduce new strategies for continued safety.
146

Care for the caregiver
Family members or others caring for a person with
AD have an extremely difficult and stressful job, which
becomes harder as the disease progresses. Dementia
caregivers spend significantly more time on caregiving
than do people providing care for those with other
types of illnesses. This type of caregiving also has a
greater impact in terms of employment complications,
caregiver strain, mental and physical health problems,
time for leisure and other family members, and family
conflict than do other types of caregiving. It is common
for AD caregivers to develop feelings of anger, resentment, guilt, and hopelessness, in addition to the sorrow
they feel for their loved one and for themselves.
Depression is an extremely common consequence of
being a full-time caregiver for a person with AD.
Support groups are an important way to deal with the
stress of caregiving. Becoming a member of an AD
caregivers’ support group can be one of the most
important things a family member does, not only for
him or herself, but for the person with AD as well. The
location and contact numbers for AD caregiver support groups are available from the Alzheimer’s
Association; they also may be available through a
local social service agency, the patient’s physician, or
pharmaceutical companies that manufacture the drugs
used to treat AD. Medical treatment for depression
may be an important adjunct to group support.
Outside help, nursing homes, and governmental
assistance
Most families eventually need outside help to
relieve some of the burden of around-the-clock care
for a person with AD. Personal care assistants, either
volunteer or paid, may be available through local social
service agencies. Adult daycare facilities are becoming
increasingly common. Meal delivery, shopping assistance, or respite care may be available as well.
Providing the total care required by a person
with late-stage AD can become an overwhelming
burden for a family, even with outside help. At this
stage, many families consider nursing home care.
This decision often is one of the most difficult for
the family, since it is often seen as an abandonment of
the loved one and a failure of the family. Careful
counseling with a sympathetic physician, clergy, or
other trusted adviser may ease the difficulties of this
transition. Selecting a nursing home may require a
difficult balancing of cost, services, location, and
availability. Keeping the entire family involved in
the decision may help prevent further stress from
developing later on.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Private long-term care insurance, special ‘‘reverse
mortgages,’’ viatical insurance, and other financial
devices are other ways of paying for care for those
with the appropriate financial situations. Further
information on these options may be available
through resources listed below.

Alternative treatment
Several substances are currently being tested
for their ability to slow the progress of Alzheimer’s
disease. These include acetylcarnitine, a supplement
that acts on the cellular energy structures known as
mitochondria. Ginkgo extract, derived from the leaves
of the Ginkgo biloba tree, appears to have antioxidant
as well as anti-inflammatory and anticoagulant properties. Ginkgo extract has been used for many years
in China and is widely prescribed in Europe for treatment of circulatory problems. A 1997 study of patients
with dementia seemed to show that ginkgo extract
could improve their symptoms, though the study was
criticized for certain flaws in its method. Large scale
follow-up studies are being conducted to determine
whether Ginkgo extract can prevent or delay the
development of AD. Ginkgo extract is available in
many health food or nutritional supplement stores.
Some alternative practitioners also advise people
with AD to take supplements of phosphatidylcholine,
vitamin B12, gotu kola, ginseng, St. Johnõs Wort,
rosemary, saiko-keishi-to-shakuyaku (A Japanese
herbal mixture), and folic acid.

Prognosis
While Alzheimer’s disease may not be the direct
cause of death, the generally poorer health of a person
with AD increases the risk of life-threatening infection, including pneumonia. In addition, other diseases
common in old age–cancer, stroke, and heart disease–
may lead to more severe consequences in a person with
AD. On average, people with AD live eight years past
their diagnosis, with a range from one to 20 years.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Prevention
Currently, there is no sure way to prevent
Alzheimer’s disease. treatments discussed above may
eventually be proven to reduce the risk of developing
the disease. Avoiding risks such as hormone replacement therapy may help prevent development of AD.
Research on the prevention of AD is focusing on
blocking the production of amyloid in the brain as well
as breaking down beta-amyloid once it is released
from cells but before it has a chance to aggregate
into insoluble plaques. There also are promising
studies being conducted to develop an AD vaccine,
where immune responses may result in the elimination
of the formation of amyloid plaques.
The Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers
(ADCs) program promotes research, training and
education, technology transfer, and multicenter and
cooperative studies in AD, other dementias, and normal brain aging. Each ADC enrolls and performs
studies on AD patients and healthy older people.
Persons can participate in research protocols and
clinical drug trials at these centers. Data from the
ADCs as well as from other sources are coordinated
and made available for use by researchers at the
National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center, established in 1999.
Resources
BOOKS

Cohen, Donna, and Carl Eisdorfer. The Loss of Self: A
Family Resource for the Care of Alzheimer’s Disease and
Related Disorders. Revised. NewYork: W.W. Norton &
Company, 2001.
Geldmacher, David S. Contemporary Diagnosis and
Management ofAlzheimer’s Disease. Newtown,
PA: Associates in Medical Marketing Co., Inc.,
2001.
Gruetzner, Howard. Alzheimer’s: A Caregiverõs Guideand
Sourcebook. 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
2001.
Mace, Nancy L., and Peter V. Rabins. The 36-Hour Day: A
Family Guide for Caring with Persons with Alzheimer
Disease, Related Dementing Illnesses, and MemoryLoss
in Later Life. New York: Warner Books, 2001.
Teitel, Rosette, and Marc L. Gordon. The Handholderõs
Handbook: A Guide for Caregivers of Alzheimerõs and
other Dementias. NewBrunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 2001.
PERIODICALS

‘‘Alzheimer’s Could be Linked to Depression.’’ GP (May 26,
2003): 4.
‘‘Alzheimer’s Could Reduced by Education.’’ The Lancet
(June 28, 2003): 2215.
147

Alzheimer’s disease

Several federal government programs may ease the
cost of caring for a person with AD, including Social
Security Disability, Medicare, and Supplemental
Security Income. Each of these programs may provide
some assistance for care, medication, or other costs,
but none of them will pay for nursing home care indefinitely. Medicaid is a state-funded program that may
provide for some or all of the cost of nursing home care,
although there are important restrictions. Details of
the benefits and eligibility requirements of these programs are available through the local Social Security
or Medicaid office, or from local social service agencies.

Amblyopia

‘‘Contrary to Some Earlier Results, New Study Shows
NSAIDs Do Not Slow Progression of Alzheimer’s
Disease.’’ The Brown University Geriatric
Psychopharmacology Update (July 2003): 1.
Gitlin, L.N., and M. Corcoran. ‘‘Making Homes Safer:
Environmental Adaptations for People with
Dementia.’’ Alzheimer’s Care Quarterly 1 (2000): 50-58.
Helmuth, L. ‘‘Alzheimer’s Congress: Further Progress on aBAmyloid Vaccine.’’ Science 289, no. 5476 (2000): 375.
Josefson, Deborah. ‘‘Latests HRT Trial Results Show Risk
of Dementia.’’ British Medical Journal (June 7, 2003):
1232.
McReady, Norah. ‘‘Prompt Intervention May Slow
Alzheimer’s Decline.’’ Family Practice News (May 1,
2003): 32-41.
Naditz, Alan. ‘‘Deeply Affected: As the Nation Ages,
Alzheimer’s Will Strike More People Close to Us.’’
Contemporary Long Term Care (July 2003): 20-23.
‘‘Researchers Believe ‘‘Silent’’ Strokes Boost Risk.’’ GP
(April 14, 2003): 9.
OTHER

Alzheimer’s Disease Books and Videotapes. <http://
www.alzheimersbooks.com>.
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health.
2000: Progress Report on Alzheimer’s Disease - Taking
the Next Steps. NIH Publication No. 4859 (2000).
<http://www.alzheimers.org/pubs/
prog00.htm#References>.

Judith Sims
Teresa G. Odle

Description
Lazy eye is a common non-medical term used to
describe amblyopia because the eye with poorer vision
doesn’t seem to be doing its job of seeing. Amblyopia
is the most common cause of impaired vision in children, affecting nearly three out of every 100 people or
2-4% of the population. Vision is a combination of the
clarity of the images of the eyes (visual acuity) and the
processing of those images by the brain. If the images
produced by the two eyes are substantially different,
the brain may not be able to fuse the images. Instead of
seeing two different images or double vision (diplopia), the brain suppresses the blurrier image. This
suppression can lead to amblyopia. During the first
few years of life, preferring one eye over the other may
lead to poor visual development in the blurrier eye.

Causes and symptoms
Some of the major causes of amblyopia are as
follows:


Strabismus. A misalignment of the eyes (strabismus)
is the most common cause of functional amblyopia.
The two eyes are looking in two different directions at
the same time. The brain is sent two different images
and this causes confusion. Images from the misaligned
or ‘‘crossed’’ eye are turned off to avoid double vision.



Anisometropia. This is another type of functional
amblyopia. In this case, there is a difference of refractive states between the two eyes (in other words, a
difference of prescriptions between the two eyes).
For example, one eye may be more nearsighted than
the other eye, or one eye may be farsighted and the
other eye nearsighted. Because the brain cannot fuse
the two dissimilar images, the brain will suppress the
blurrier image, causing the eye to become amblyopic.



Cataract. Clouding of the lens of the eye will cause
the image to be blurrier than the other eye. The brain
‘‘prefers’’ the clearer image. The eye with the cataract
may become amblyopic.



Ptosis. This is the drooping of the upper eyelid. If
light cannot enter the eye because of the drooping lid,
the eye is essentially not being used. This can lead to
amblyopia.



Nutrition. A type of organic amblyopia in which
nutritional deficiencies or chemical toxicity may
result in amblyopia. Alcohol, tobacco, or a deficiency
in the B vitamins may result in toxic amblyopia.



Heredity. Amblyopia can run in families.

Ambiguous genitals see Intersex states

I Amblyopia
Definition
Amblyopia is an uncorrectable decrease in vision in
one or both eyes with no apparent structural abnormality seen to explain it. It is a diagnosis of exclusion,
meaning that when a decrease in vision is detected,
other causes must be ruled out. Once no other cause is
found, amblyopia is the diagnosis. Generally, a difference of two lines or more (on an eye-chart test of visual
acuity) between the two eyes or a best corrected vision
of 20/30 or worse would be defined as amblyopia. For
example, if someone has 20/20 vision with the right eye
and only 20/40 with the left, and the left eye cannot
achieve better vision with corrective lenses, the left eye
is said to be amblyopic.
148

Barring the presence of strabismus or ptosis,
children may or may not show signs of amblyopia.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Anisometropia—An eye condition in which there
is an inequality of vision between the two eyes.
There may be unequal amounts of nearsightedness,
farsightedness, or astigmatism, so that one eye will
be in focus while the other will not.
Cataract—Cloudiness of the eye’s natural lens.
Occulsion therapy—A type of treatment for
amblyopia in which the good eye is patched for a
period of time. This forces the weaker eye to be
used.
Man with a lazy eye. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced
by permission.)

Children may hold their heads at an angle while trying
to favor the eye with normal vision. They may have
trouble seeing or reaching for things when approached
from the side of the amblyopic eye. Parents should
see if one side of approach is preferred by the child
or infant. If an infant’s good eye is covered, the child
may cry.

Diagnosis
Because children with outwardly normal eyes may
have amblyopia, it is important to have regular vision
screenings performed for all children. While there is
some controversy regarding the age children should
have their first vision examination, their eyes can, in
actuality, be examined at any age, even at one day of life.
Some recommend that children have their vision
checked by their pediatrician, family physician,
ophthalmologist, or optometrist at or before six
months of age. Others recommend testing by at least
the child’s fourth birthday. There may be a ‘‘critical
period’’ in the development of vision, and amblyopia
may not be treatable after age eight or nine. The earlier
amblyopia is found, the better the possible outcome.
Most physicians test vision as part of a child’s medical
examination. If there is any sign of an eye problem,
they may refer a child to an eye specialist.
There are objective methods, such as retinoscopy,
to measure the refractive status of the eyes. This can
help determine anisometropia. In retinoscopy, a handheld instrument is used to shine a light in the child’s (or
infant’s) eyes. Using hand-held lenses, a rough prescription can be obtained. Visual acuity can be determined using a variety of methods. Many different eye
charts are available (e.g., tumbling E, pictures, or
letters). In amblyopia, single letters are easier to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE

Strabismus—A condition in which the eyes are
misaligned and point in different directions. One
eye may look straight ahead, while the other turns
inward, outward, upward, or downward. This is
also called crossed-eyes.
Visual acuity—Acuity is the acuteness or sharpness
of vision.

recognize than when a whole line is shown. This is
called the ‘‘crowding effect’’ and helps in diagnosing
amblyopia. Neutral density filters may also be held
over the eye to aid in the diagnosis. Sometimes visual
fields to determine defects in the area of vision will be
performed. Color vision testing may also be performed. Again, it must be emphasized that amblyopia
is a diagnosis of exclusion. Visual or life-threatening
problems can also cause a decrease in vision. An examination of the eyes and visual system is very important
when there is an unexplained decrease in vision.